[Page 1]
MICROCOPY RESOLUTION,IEST CHART
NATI9NAL -BUREN OF:,144:,111101190-A


[Page 2]
ED 079 204
AUTHOR
TITLE
INSTITUTION
PUB DATE
NOTE
AVAILABLE FROM
EDRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS
DOCUMENT RESUME
Banks, James A., Ed.
Teaching Ethnic Studies:
43rd Yearbook.
National Council for the
D.C.
73
315p.
National Council for the Social Studies, 1201
Sixteenth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036
($7.50, Clothbound; $6.00, Paperbound)
SO 006 004
Concepts andStrategies.
Social Studies, Washington,
MF-$0.65 HC Not Available from EDRS.
Books; Concept Teaching,; Cultural Pluralism; *Ethnic
Studies; Feminism; *Minority Groups; *Racism; Social
Change; *Social Studies; *Teaching Techniques;
Values; Yearbooks
ABSTRACT
Twelve authors present new conceptual frameworks for
studying about ethnic groups, and for analyzing American society, and
describe promising strategies and materials in this 431d yearbook.
The book is arranged into three major parts. In Part One, the authors
proVide perceptive analyses of institutional racism, social justice,
and power relationships in America, and also suggest ways in which
the teacher can deal with both individual and institutional racism.
In addition, one. author describes how ethnic content can be used to
spearhead instructional reform. The next five chapters in Part Two
focus on the historical and sociological problems of ethnic minority
groups, and describe ways in which the teacher can incorporate their
experiences into the social studies curriculum. Authors are various
members of ethnic groups and speak from their perspective. The final
part of this book explores the problems of two groups victimized by
stereotypes and cultural assaults -- white ethnics and women.
Strategy exercises are appended to several chapters..(Author/SJN)


[Page 3]
Teaching
Ethnic Studies
Co-ceptsaiStrategies
JAMES A. BANKS, EDITORNATIONAL COUNCIL
43rd YEARBOOK, 1973FOR THE SOCIAL STUDIES
X
/'
'FILMED FROM BEST AVAILABLE COPY


[Page 4]
Teaching Ethnic Studies
Concepts and Strategies
.-,


[Page 5]
Contributors
James A. Banks
Mildred Dickeman
Geneva Gay
David Ballesteros
Barbara A. Sizemore
Larry Cuban
Lowell K. Y. Chun-Hoon
Carlos E. Cortes
Jack D. Forbes
Francesco Cordasco
Diego Castellanos
Mark M. Krug
Janice Law Trecker
Elizabeth 0. Pearson


[Page 6]
.
4-
tTeaching Ethnic StudiestN.1
ir._Concepts and Strategiesc);Q
!Ld.."
1
t
! r
r,.
PERMISSION TO REPRODUCETHIS
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL BYMICRO.
FICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTEDBY
AL-5-2-5,
TO ERIC AND ORGANIZATIONSOPERAT
ING UNDER AGREEMENTS WITHTHE NA
TIONAL ,INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION
FURTHER REPRODUCTION OUTSIDE
THE ERIC SYSTEM REQUIRESFERMIS
SION OF THE COPYRIGHT ...'NNER"
JAMES A. BANKS, Editor
43rd Yearbook1973
NATIONAL
COUNCIL
FOR THE
SOCIAL
S'T'UDIES
A National Affiliate of the
National Education Association
1201 Sixteenth Street, N. W.
Washington, D. C. 20036
Paperbound, $6.00; Clothbound, $7.50
......__.---------


[Page 7]
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE SOCIAL STUDIES
Officers for 1973
President
Harris L. Dante
Kent State University
Kent, Ohio
President-Elect
Stanley P. Wronski
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
Vice-President
Jean Tilford
Cincinnati (Ohio) Public Schools
Executive Secretary
Merrill F. Hartshorn
Washington, D.C.
Associate Secretary
T. Marcus Gillespie
Washington, D.C.
Editor
Daniel Roselle
Washington, D.C.
Directors
Joan Alcorn
James A. Banks
Charles E. Billings
H. Thomas Collins
Dorothy L. Dunn
Shirley H. Engle
Jean Fair
John Jarolimek
Dana G. Kurfman
John McAulay
Lee H. Smith
Ida Fabian Spirawk
Bob L. Taylor
George G.-Watson, Jr.
Publications Board
ROBERT BEERY, Chairman
ROBERT BARR
CHARLES BILLINGS
MARK KRUG
ANNA S. OCHOA
NANCY SPRAGUE
The National Council for the Social Studies is a National Affiliate of the
National Education Association of the United States. It is the professional
organization of educators at all levelselementary, secondary, college, and
universitywho are interested in the teaching of social studies. Membership in
the National Council for the Social Studies includes a subscription to the
Council's official journal, Social Education, and a copy of the Yearbook. In
addition, the Council publishes bulletins, curriculum studies, pamphlets, and
other materials of practical use for teachers of the social studies. Membership
dues are $15.00 a year. Applications for membership and orders for the purchase
of publications should be sent to the Executive Secretary, 1201 Sixteenth Street,
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.
Copyright e 1973 by the
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE SOCIAL STUDIES
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 73-75298


[Page 8]
Dedicated
to
JOHN JAROLIMEK AND JEAN FAIR
Two distinguished NCSS Presidents
who struggled to eliminate racism and social injustice


[Page 9]
Foreword
We are all immigrants, yet one of the great blots on the record of
American democracy is the manner in which the fate of the first inhabi-
tants, later arrivals, and minc rity groups in general has been entrusted to
the Anglo-Saxon majority.Native Americans were exterminated,
cheated, relegated to less desirable lands, and deprived of justice. Black
Americans were brought here against their will, enslaved, treated as
inferiors, and omitted from the mainstream of American society. Span-
ish-speaking Americans have been dealt with as aliens rather than citi-
zens and have likewise been exploited and discriminated against. Orien-
tal Americans have been regarded as different; inscrutable, mysterious
persons, and have experienced loss of civil rights and other privileges of
citizenship. Many European ethnic groups have fought their way up
from the bottom of the economic ladder only to find themselves on the
cutting edge of our great urban problems. Unfortunately, those groups
along with the urban poor and other minority groups do not realize the
extent to which they are pitted against each other to the advantage of
the power structure. American Jews have been the victims of anti-
Semitism and often stereotyped, with the diversity that exists among
them overlooked. Women have been subordinated in our history and
treated as second-class citizens in the economic arena, as well as in day-
to-day personal and social relationships.
Textbooks and school curricula too often have sustained the status
quo, helped entrench the stereotypes, and narrated the myth and the
vii


[Page 10]
folklore. In some instances gestures were made to indicate that various
individuals had contributed to American culture but, in general, Mark
Twain's "great lie of silence" prevailed.
The demands of minority groups for an equal opportunity to sitat the
American table of abundance and for an equal chance at the starting
block became a major part of the great social upheavals of the 1960's.
There were many who believed that the conscience of America was
speaking and that we were in turmoil because we took our ideals seri-
ously and, in spite of everything, have guilt feelings over our shortcom-
ings. Some have said that the self-criticism in which we have engaged
and the tolerance granted the protestors indicate that as a society the
United States is receptive to change and that many share in part, at
least, the belief that things could be better. It haseven been suggested
that our complacency has been shaken while there is still time to set
things right. There have been indications that many are ready torecog-
nize the pluralism of American society and even to value the differences
among us more than to insist on conformity.
On the other hand, there are some indications that the revolution of
the last decade has lost much of its strength. The forces thatare opposed
to change are firmly entrenched, the affluent majority has lapsed into
indifference, and many Americans are tired and frustrated.
This Yeirbook is evidence that the National Council for the Social
Studies has not lessened in its concern or given up in its attempt to make
the social studies meaningful and useful in aiding teachers and students
to understand and to contribute toward the solution of the desperate
problems of our time. It is further fitting that this should bea hard-
hitting and courageous work, for-while there has been some improve-
ment in the treatment of minorities in textbooks it has not been enough.
The membership has a right to expect that NCSS publications will deal
more forthrightly with social issues than might be expected of commer
cial publishers. It is a hopeful sign that in recent years the National
Council for the Social Studies has actively been dealing with the real
issues that are of prime importance. The programs, the work of its
committees, its publications, and other actions indicate that the Council
is "getting it together." This Yearbook is further testimony to the direc-
tion we have set for ourselves.
The editor and the various authors have made a significant contribu-
tion in increasing our knowledge, sensitivity, and awareness ofmany
things that teachers need to know about in this critical area. Thecon-
tributors are not only distinguished scholars, but experts, who have
dedicated their lives and their professional careers in teaching and
working with the minority groups of whom they write. Teachers will nit
only gain insight into a sensitive educational issue, but will learn teach-
viii


[Page 11]
ing strategies ranging from problems of bilingualism to the cultural
differences between groups that require a variety of approaches and
understandings. Any teacher will profit from learning more about the
covert cues to teaching about various ethnic cultures.
The National Council for the Social Studies is very much indebted to
the authors of this Yearbook. Their contributiodis further evidence of
their commitment to the profession and to humanity.
HARRIS L. DANTE, President
National Council for the Social Studies
ix


[Page 12]
Introduction
For any reader, this book will be-a profound experience. It will evoke a
wide range of emotions, including pain, anger, compassion, disillusion-
ment, despair, admiration, and hope. It is a hard-hitting book written by
a group of fighters who have an unrelenting commitment to social
justice. Their words are sometimes bitter and incisive, but their restraint
is a tribute to their wisdom and scholarship.
This is not a book written by a group of irrational radicals who use
these pages for a counterproductive catharsis. Rather, it is a book
penned by a distinguished group of scholarssocial scientists and edu-
catorswho have spent.the bulk of their lives fighting* for human rights.
Although they have experienced many frustrations in their perennial
struggleswhich their writings reflectthey have not despaired. They
believe that change is possible and that what teachers do in the class-
room, or don't do, can make a difference. This is probably the greatest
significance of this book. It is bound to help every teacher who reads it
to sense the urgency of the racial crisis in our nation, and to develop a
commitment to act to resolve it.
The reader who wants a rosy picture of ethnic relations in America
and a veneration o',' American democracy should avoid this book. How-
ever, the teacher who wants to help make this a more just and open
society will find this book very helpful and edifying. The authors de-
scribe some concrete things which the teacher can do.
From the time that I was very young, I have had a keen interest in the
xi


[Page 13]
problems and frustrations of Black Americans. Because of this interest, I
have spent much of my career researching and writing in Black Studies.
To some extent, I became so encapsulated with the plight of my people
that I was blinded to the problems of other oppressed groups. I was
unable to fully see the oppression of Blacks as an integral part of a
larger problem shared by all exploited groups in America. I have learned
a great deal from the authors of this book, most of whom I know
personally and highly respect. They have helped me to broaden my
perspective and to intensify my commitment to help make this a humane
society. While I must still focus much of my energy on the problems of
Black Americans for personal reasons, I now realize that Blacks will not
be free rntil institutionalized oppression and racismin all of their ugly
and destructive formshave been eradicated and power relationships in
this nation have been radically modified.
I am deeply honored that I convinced the people from wnom I have
learned so much in recent years to share their rich experiences and
wisdom with you in these pages. Jack D. Forbes, while we were fighting
to eliminate racism in the California state-adopted textbooks, taught me
about the sins and genocide which have been committed against Native
Americans and to appreciate the beauty and stamina of his people.
Before I knew Jack and his seminal works, most of what I knew about
Native Americans had been learned from antiseptic textbooks and Sat-
urday afternoon TV Westerns. During the same time, Lowell Chun-
Hoon helped me to see the poignant plight of Asian-Americans, and
Carlos Cortes deepened my knowledge and concern for the Chicano
struggle. I learned from Barbara A. Sizemore that excluded groups need
power to become liberated and the stages that the, may have to experi-
ence to achieve inclusion into the American soc .1 order, and yet pre-
serve their distinctive ethnic characteristics. If y.1 read their chapters
carefully-and take thew seriously, I believe that you can learn as much
from Jack, Lowell, Carlos and Barbara, and the other writers, as I have
learned, and that this knowledge will strengthen and help you to develop
a strong commitment to eliminating injustice in this nation. It is impera-
tive that we act now to humanize this society. Racial and ethnic polari-
zation threatens to destroy it.
The chapters in this book include a gold mine of information which
should be very valuable to teachers. The authors present new conceptual
frameworks for studying about ethnic groups and for analyzing Ameri-
can society. They also describe promising strategies and materials. Eliza-
beth 0. Pearson wrote strategy exercises which are appended to several
chapters. Mildred Dickeman, Geneva Gay, David Ballesteros and Bar-
bara A. Sizemore provide perceptive and terse analyses of institutional
racism, social justice and power relationships in America. They suggest
xii


[Page 14]
ways in which the teacher can deal with both individual and institu-
tional racism. Larry Cuban describes how ethnic content can be used to
spearhead instructional reform.
Five of the chapters focus on the problems of specific America
ethnic minority groups. In these chapters, members of the various ethnic
groups speak for themselves. I feel very strongly, and the NCSS Publica-
tions Board shares this view, that we have reached a point in our history
in which we must hear from the victims of racism since for too long most
books-have been written by writers who were members of powerful and
ruling groups. This does not mean'that sincere white scholars should not
write about the problems of Blacks, Chicanos, Native Americans, Asian-
Americans and Puerto Rican- Americans. However, we desperately need
to view events from the perspectives of those who have been victimized
if we are to fully understand the American drama and formulate effec-
tive change strategies.
These chapters deal with the historical and sociological problems of
ethnic minority groups, and describe ways in which the teacher can
incorporate their experiences into the social studies curriculum. Each
author approaches his topic in a unique way. The approaches range
from Chun- Hoon'siargely historical and poignant description of Asian-
Americans to Forbes' plea that we incorporate Native American values
into the curriculum so that America may be redeemed. The reader will
be moved by the powerful Native Anherican poetry in Forbes' chapter.
Cortes presents a historical overview of the Chicano experience and a
useful conceptual frame of reference which can be used to teach about
any culture. Banks uses elements from the Black experience to illustrate
ways in which to establish a multiethnic social studies program. Cor-
dasco and Castellanos stress the ...teed for bilingual education for Span-
ish-speaki :g students.
The final part of this book explores the problems of two groups which
have also been victimized by stereotypes and cultural assaultswhite
ethnics and women. While their problems differ in many significant
ways from those of racial minorities, the teacher who wishes to make his
social studies program truly liberating must help students to view these
groups with new lenses. Mark M. Krug speaks directly to the problems
of white ethnics and reveals that life for them, to quote the gifted poet
Langston Hughes, has not been a "crystal st sir." Janice Law Trecker
argues that we will not have an open society until women are treated as
human beings.
I am exceedingly grateful to the distin ;. 'shed and gifted scholars who
took the time from demanding schedu'es and important activities to
contribute to this Yearbook. I am especially indebted to Geneva Gay
and David Ballesteros for their willingness to condense projected NCSS


[Page 15]
publications into chapters for the Yearbook. Their contributions add
important perspectives to the book. I also wish to thank Anna Ochoa,
former Chairman of the NCSS Publications Board, who convinced me
against strong resistanceto edit this Yearbook, and who paid a high
price for its completiont,Without Anna, this Yearbook would not have
come to fruition. I am also indebted to John Jarolimek who gave birth
to this project while he was President of NCSS because he was con-
vinced that racism must be massively attacked on every front. The
NCSS Racism and Social Justice Committee played a pivotal role in the
development of the Yearbook, and former NCSS President Jean Fair
strongly supported the Committee. -Daniel Roselle and James Cass,
former Education Editor of Saturday Review, helped me to identify
contributors for the Yearbook; and Willadene Price handled the pro-
duction aspects of the manuscript. As with each of my books, my wife
Cherry shared the joys and pains of getting this one done. To her, I am
eternally grateful.
xiv
JAMES A. BANKS


[Page 16]
Contents
FOREWORD by Harris L. Dantevii
INTRODUCTIONXi
PART ONE:Racism, Cultural Pluralism, and Social Justice..1
I.TEACHING CULTURAL PLURALISM5
Mildred Dickeman
2.RACISM IN AMERICA: IMPERATIVES FOR
TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES27
Geneva Gay
3.SOCIAL JUSTICE AND MINORITIES51
David Ballesteros
4.SHATTERING THE MEL ING POT MYTH73
Barbara A. Sizemore
5.ETHNIC CONTENT AND "WHITE" INSTRUCTION103
Larry Cuban
xvi


[Page 17]
PART TWO: Teaching About EthnicMinority Cultures....115
6.TEACHING THE ASIAN-AMERICAN EXPERIENCE119
Lowell K. E Chun-Hoon
7.TEACHING BLACK STUDIES FOR SOCIALCHANGE149
James A. Banks
8.TEACHING THE CHICANO EXPERIENCE181
Carlos E. Cortes
9.TEACHING NATIVE AMERICAN VALUES ANDCULTURES201
Jack D. Forbes
10.TEACHING THE PUERTO RICAN EXPERIENCE227
Francesco Cordasco with Diego Castellanos
PART THREE: Teaching About WhiteEthnic Groups
and Women's Rights254
11.TEACHING THE EXPERIENCE OF WHITEETHNIC GROUPS.257
Mark M. Krug
12.TEACHING THE ROLE OF WOMEN
IN AMERICAN HISTORY279
Janice Law Trecker
xvii


[Page 18]
^, ,, ,Lyn4.1 V4vi
44004i.r4s4s41444414,444e41,.:44141.41:7Z4U


[Page 19]
Part One
RACISM,
CULTURAL PLURALISM,
AND SOCIALJUSTICE
Institutional racism is pervasive in America. It adversely affects both its
perpetuators and victims. Racism causes majority groups to develop a
sense of false superiority and confused identities and ethnicminority
groups to inculcate feelings of inferiority and deflated self-concepts. In a
racist society, all groups are unable to develop positive attitudes toward
self and others. Racism is a dehumanizing and destructive social phe-
nomenon which must be c.itically analyzed in the classroomif we are to
develop a more just society.
Part One of the book explores the nature of racism and some of the
myths and power relationships which have emerged to justify and sus-
tain it. The authors not only discuss problems but describe ways in
which the social stu lies teacher can help to make America a nation in
which cultural pluralism is valued and social justice is a reality. Particu-
lar attention is given to the need for teachers and students to confront
their own racial feelings and perceptions before undertaking a study of
ethnic content. Without such confrontations, the integrity of ethnic
content will be seriously violated and its impact considerably reduced.
In the opening chapter, Dickeman critically examines the American
educational system and concludes that it is racist by design. This conclu-
sion is confirmed by her scholarly examination of the school's curricu-
lum, its goals, and its role in forcing students to reject their ethnic
cultures. Dickeman contends that the concept of individual opportunity
in America, which states that we all have equal access to the riches of
America, is a myth. Her mode of analysis is anthropological, her tone is
1


[Page 20]
2TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
hard hitting, and the result is a profound chapter thatwill evoke serious
reflection.
In the next chapter, Gay providesa candid and insightful analysis of
racism in our society. She argues that racismnot only harms minorities,
but whites as well, and that its eradication willimprove the mental
health of all Americans. The author presentsa useful definition of
racism, and a perceptive discussion of individual, culturaland institu-
tional racism. Gay provides a vivid picture of racism inall of its destruc-
tive forms. The reader will find her candid examplesof subtle racism,
which she regards as the most dangerous form, revealingand perhaps
personally discomforting. She ends her chapter withsome useful strate-
gies for studying racism in the classroom.
Drawing heavily upon the cultures of Chicanosto substantiate his
arguments, Ballesteros, in the next chapter, documentsthe gap between
the ideals about social justice in America and the injusticesexperienced
by minority groups in all of our social institutions.Particular attention is
given to the devastating effects whichour educational, judicial and
welfare systems have on minorities. Ballesteros contendschat the "An-
glo-Point-of-View Problem" is largely responsible forthe destructive
myths about ethnic groups that have served to justify thediscriminatior
which minorities experience in social institutions.He issues a plea for
the school to play a major role in the reduction ofstereotypes and fear
of minorities and to help developan appreciation and understanding of
their rich cultural and linguistic diversity. Ballesterosprovides the
teacher with sample questions thatcan be used to teach about social
justice in social studies classes.
The melting pot theory was created and sustainedbecause it was
necessary to legitimize and maintain capitalism, argues Sizemore inthe
next chapter. The author contends thatmany American institutions,
such as the church and the school, have perpetuatedthe melting pot
theory, which she regards as a functional myth for thosein power, and
detrimental for powerless and minoritygroups because it forces them to
abandon their unique cultures. It is psychologicallyharmful, she be-
lieves, for a group to give up its culture. The authorpresents a model
which delineates the steps that excludedgroups can take to obtain
power and inclusion within the larger society while maintainingtheir
cultural identities. Sizemoreargues that we must involve a larger range
of people in educational decision-makingto improve the school. She
presents a 'model for broader participation anda sample unit that
reflects her ideas about the kind ofopen and participatory school which
she envisions.
In the final chapter of Part One, Cuban describesthe value of ethnic
content but expresses a fear that ethnic studies will bedoomed unless


[Page 21]
i
Racism, Cultural Pluralism, and Social Justice3
substantial educational reform occurs. v ithout both new instructional
goals and methods, ethnic studies programs are little more than tradi-
tional history with different characters. Cuban contends that the most
important variable in ethnic studies programs is the teacher. Unless
classroom teachers change their attitudes, behavior and strategies, ethnic
studies will have little impact. Focusing attention on curriculum reform,
he argues, is evading the real problems.


[Page 22]
Mildred Dickeman
MILDRED DICKEMAN is Professor and former Chairman of the
Department of Anthropology at Sonoma State College. She is a graduate
of the University of Michigan (Phi Beta Kappa) and received her Ph.D.
in Anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley. Professor
Dickeman has done ethnographic work in New Guinea and on Native
American cultures. She has taught at Merritt College, University of
California, Berkeley and the University of Kansas. Dr. Dickeman is a
Fellow or the American Anthropological Association, and a member of
the Council on Anthropology and Education and the Board of Directors
of the Southwest Intergroup Council. She was Editor and Assistant
Editor of the Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers in 1955-56. Pro-
fessor Dickeman frequently conducts workshops for teachers on teach-
ing about ethnic cultures and has contributed to the books Culture and
Poverty: A Critique and With All Due Respects: Thoughts on Commu-
nity and Diversity in The Southwest.
4
.............).


[Page 23]
MILDRED DICKEMAN
Teaching
Cultural Pluralism
In a provocative analysis of the growth of the American school bureau-
cracy, Michael B. Katz describes some significant characteristics of the
school system which emerged during the 1880's and have persisted till
today. American public education was and remains "universal, tax-sup-
ported, free, compulsory, bureaucratically arranged, class-biased and
racist."' All of these characteristics are, as Katz demonstrates, closely
interrelated. They derive ,from the historic and continuing functions of
public education in this society. It follows that if we hope to reform one
of these aspects of the institution, we may have to consider its ties to the
others as a part of a functional whole, and the possibility that more
extended reform may be required to achieve our goals.
I am concerned here with the elimination of racial and cultural bias
from the school system. But an effective attack on that problem requires
an understanding of the process by which our schools became racist
institutions, and the reasons why they anstill characterized, for the
most part, by a pervasive racism today. Currently, a wide variety of
attacks are being made on the schools' failure to recognize cultural and
racial diversity, from curricular reform and experiments in teaching
method to teacher recruitment. Yet many of these attempts will,I
believe, remain only superficial, and will end by giving merely the
appearance of change, unless the dimensions of the problem are first
understood.
American schools are racist by design. Their racism is part of a larger
5


[Page 24]
6TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
philosophy, an ethnocentric dedication to the remodelling of citizensto
conform to a single homogeneous acceptable model. That dedication,
that definition of the function of schools, was formed in the period from
1830 to 1880, during which a modern, industrial class-stratified society
was emerging, in which the ethnic diversity of this country was consider-
ably increased by the immigration of large numbers of Europeans who
formed a new mass of urban poor. Of course this nationwas already
incredibly diverse: upon the original variety of Indian cultures had been
is. imposed European, African and Mexican- Spanish traditions. Cultural,
religious and racial differences already existed. But in 1830, most of that
diversity existed far outside the centers of growing industrialpower.
Non-Europeans were either slaves or Indians (either enemyor con-
tained), and most Mexican territories had not yet been incorporated.
The mass importation of Oriental labor had not yet begun. At the leapt
these non-North Europeans were distant rural dwellers. This diversity
could be ignored. Economic and social power was firmly in the hands of
a small White minority of predominantly Anglo-Saxon and Germanic
descent. It was the influx of a large laboring class of diverse languages,
religions and values into the growing urban centers which createda
problem for the emerging White power structure.
But what should have been a major dialogue for a growing democracy
failed to take place. To what degree is conformitynecessary for a federal
system of representative democracy? In what areas is a consensus of
values required, in what areas may cultural diversity persist andeven be
an asset? These questions were never explored. Instead, the dominant
elite opted for the perpetuation, indeed the creation, of a homogeneous
ruling class. Our failure as a nation to explore this critical issue has left
us, one hundred years later, not only with no clear answers to which we
,t as a people can agree, but with the consequences of a century of evasion
and of generations of educational racism..
What instead developed was a mass system of public indoctrination.
That system had two functions: first, to create a lower, laboring class
which was docile and controllable, and which adhered sufficiently to the
values and myths of the American ruling class that it was not likely to
question its place in society. The second was the function of selection.
Every society, to survive, must possess methods for the replacement of
its elite. If that elite does not provide enough members to replace itself,
and this is especially the case in an expanding society,new members of
the upper castes and classes must be drawn from the lower ranks. The
schools' function was, then, to select those few, as needed, whopos-
sessed adequate loyalty and sufficient conformity in attitudes, values,
behavior and appearance, to be adopted into the expanding middle
class.


[Page 25]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism7
It is predictable that in those periods of our history when there have
been major needs for recruitment into the middle class, when rapid
expansion of the industrial and service sectors of the economy has
required large numbers of new, responsible dominant Americans, there
has been a relaxation of barriers, and the degree and amount of mobility
have increased. A shortage of Anglo-Saxons during the period of rapid
growth of the urban public sector of the economy at the turn of the
century made possible the entry of large numbers of Jews, Irish and
Italians into city services, politics and the professions, including teach-
ing. But in periods of economic decline, the doers of entry into the
middle class constrict. A decreased' demand for new replacements since
the Second World War, coupled with massive migrations into urban
centers, has meant increased difficulty of entry for racial minorities, for
lower-class European-Americans and for women, with a consequent rise
both in ethnic discontent and disillusionment, and in various expressions
of racism on the part of both dominant and subordinate groups. In all
this the schools have played their part.
Thus the publie education system has become the major social sorting
mechanism in this society, and the major means of instilling social
control. In so doing, it seems to have become, as well, the major agency
involved in the creation and evolution of modern middle-class values,
far more influential, I suspeCt, than such commonly indicated sources as
the mass media. The characteristics of the system listed by Katz appear,
in this light, not at all surprising. That agency whose function is indoctri-
nation and control of all but the reliable elite has of necessity to be
compulsory. h, order to impose values and behavior from the top down
upon large masses of diverse individuals, rigid bureaucracies with hierar-
chical chains of command had to be created. Any institution whose
major clientele is the poor must, of course, be free and tax-supported.
And as the prime screening agency in a society which demands a
homogeneous elite, the public school system has, surely, to be institu-
tionally, designedly racist. It could not be otherwise.
When I propose that the schools are by nature racist, I do not mean to
suggest that either me designers or the perpetuators of this bureaucratic
system were or are consciously so. On the contrary, probably few of
those involved in the creation and maintenance of the public educa-
tional system have been aware of this aspect of their actions. Many
social functions, in any society, are best carried on by individuals who
are thus unaware of the larger patterns in which they play a part. And
for good reason: the unconscious actor is less likely to question either
the system as a whole and its consequences or his own role in it. For this
reason, institutional or unconscious racism may indeed be the preferred
method of ensuring that the school bureaucracy carry out its functions.


[Page 26]
8TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
That this system grew out of the needs and perspectives of a dominant
power structure there can be no doubt. But that that power structure
should have known, or knows today, all of the reasons for all of its
behavior, or all of the implications and operations of the institutions
which it creates and supports, would contradict all we understand about
the nature of human social systems. The point here is not the level of
awareness on the part of participant bureaucrats. The point is rather
that it is and has been the school's function to be racist.
As these functions of the schools were crystallizing in the late nine-
teenth century, at the same time an ideology, a mythology was taking
shape in this country. All mythologies serve to interpret reality in ways
useful to the perpetuation of a society. In this case an ideology arose
which interpreted the existence of ethnic diversity in America in ways
supportive of the sociopolitical establishment. Probably the schools
played an important role in the creation of this ideology. Certainly they
came to serve as the major institutions for its propagation. It is impor-
tant for us to examine this mythology in some detail.
The core concept of the American mythological system is the notion
of individual opportunity. In the land of opportunity each individual,
given equal access to the acquisition of necessary skills, is able to rise to
the level of his own innate ability to fulfill his potential through free
movement upward. The public schools, we are told, are the major means
through which individual potential is actualized, by providing maximal
training for all who can profit from it. Upon this educational base, the
competitive forces of a free society ensure that the striving of individuals
will place them where they are most suited and most effective. Unequal
in talent, but equal in opportunity, we are all presumed to be striving
upward toward positions which are at once the most personally satisfy-
ing and the most socially rewarding. The best man, then, always wins,
and we may all become President if we only have the talent for it, for in
this mythic system, talent is the only variable. Absent from this myth is,
interestingly, the notion that some individuals may not want or value
upward mobility.
A corollary of this mythical premise is that the upward striving of
individuals from various ethnic groups results in a "melting pot." Diver-
sities are left behind. They play no role in either helping or hindering
advancement, but are irrelevant, given the American skills acquired in
schools and the opportunities of the American social landscape. What
remain are only the diversities of last name and of acceptable religious
and food preferences, trivial in themselves but important as testimonies
to the success of the system and the validity of the myth.
To be convincing, however, this explanatory system must confront a
salient fact: individuals of all ethnic backgrounds are not equally dis-


[Page 27]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism9
tributed throughout all levels of our society. This fact requires explana-
tion if the myth is to retain credibility. The explanations are simple, and
there are two from which to choose. In the first, an observation of
limited truth has been enlarged into a total generalization regarding
American history: the movement of individuals upward into the domi-
nant society is dependent in part upon the date of arrival of their ethnic
group in this country. Thus, we are told, certain Anglo-Saxon and North
European groups, because they arrived earlier in large numbers, have
moved ,i,,ward sooner, but are followed by those later arrivals, Mediter-
raneans and East Europeans for example, who, given the same length of
time in which to take advantage of America's societal opportunities, take
their places in their turn alongside the members of earlier groups. It is
the proponents of this explanation who maintain that all need only wait
their turn to succeed.
An alternate version is proposed by those less convinced of the inevit-
ability of upward advance. This explanation of differential success rests
on the assumption of innate racial differences in ability. According to
this version, differences in the distribution of ethnic groups throughout
our society are a consequence of differences in the distribution of talents
between such groups. The most significant thing about both of these
versions, largely ignored in the continuing argument between their pro-
ponents, is their unquestioning acceptance of the basic assumption that
there indeed exists equal opportunity for fulfillment for all groups and
individuals, and by extension, that opportunities for upward movement
are the same today as they were in the expanding society of the late
nineteenth century. Each of these assertions is, of course, absurd.
Needless to say, the historical and sociological accuracy of this myth
leaves much to be desired. Individuals do not have equal access to the
opportunities and rewards of American society. And the prime reason
for this is that our society does not treat individuals as such but primar-
ily and initially as members of ethnic groups. The classification and
ranking in which this society engages is essentially on the basis of group
characteristics, both biological and cultural, which determine initial
placement in a hierarchy of classes and castes. And that ranking began,
for those not native to this country, in the racist and culturally biased
immigration laws, labor recruitment practices and slave importations
which defined their placement in the hierarchy long before they set foot
on our soil. It is only secondarily that a person who is able to remove
himself from affiliation with such a group is accorded, to some degree,
treatment as an individual.
Listening to America, we must be struck that, in spite of what our
mythology tells us regarding the treatment of all as individuals, our
language reveals a proliferation of terms for ethnic groups suggesting a


[Page 28]
10TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
concern with their existence which borders on the obsessive. "Majority,"
"minority," "ethnic," "race," are the polite terms of social discourse. But
it is the specific terms of derogation that have done the linguistic dirty
work in this country: "nigger" and "kike" and "okie" and "hunky" and
"spik" and all the others. Everyone knows that thesegroups rse ranked.
They are ranked on the basis of the degree to which theypossess a
certain cluster of desirabh: traits, biological and cultural, whichare
usually said to have characterized the founding Anglo-Saxon. Thus,
biologically, those least "Nordic" or "Anglo-Saxon" inappearance
stand lowest on the ladder. Those biological traits chosen for sorting
criteria are those most easily observable about the face and head,pre-
cisely those which are most useful for rapid classification ofanonymous
individuals in a wide variety of social encounters: skin color,eye color,
hair color and form, and the structure of nose and lips being primary.
This scheme has, of course, no validity as a biologicalconstruct. It is
strictly social in origin and in function. All of theenormous individual
diversity in these traits is classified, not in terms ofany scientific under-
standing of human biology, but in terms ofan ideal type, an ideal
"Nordic" concept which exists in the minds of the members of the
dominant society. In terms of this ideal, the blond, blue-eyed,wavy-
haired, narrow-nosed and narrow-lipped are the all-American good
guys. The greater deviance from this ideal type on the part of individual
or group, the lower his or its rank in the American social hierarchy.
In addition, there is a cluster of sociocultural traits involved, which
contains such obvious matters as language, including dialect andaccent,
religion and dress, and more subtle matters suchas manners, body
posture, family structure, values and attitudes. Again, the classification
is in terms of a presumed Anglo-Saxon Puritan ideal of questionable
historicity: inner-directed, individually responsible, morally upright,ra-
tional and emotionally restrained, ambitious but socially unostentatious,
competitive, cleanly, prudent of time, money and self. Against this Boy
Scout in long pants our society measures all claimantsto status and
power.
Thus in actual operation, though not in its mythology,our society
ranks groups on the basis of their distance froma hypothetical North
. European middle-class norm. And the function of this ranking is to
determine the degree of opportunity for upward mobility to which the
members of each ethnic group will have access. Consequently the lower
the rank, the more unequal the opportunity, the less likely will beentry
into the dominant society and the greater the individual luck and striv-
ing which will be required to achieve it. It is clear enough, then, thatthe
access of ethnic group members to power and status has little to do with
the date of their arrival. American Indians, Blacks and Mexican-Ameri-


[Page 29]
"What of the theory of the 'Melting pot' "? How many of these immigrants who
arrived at Ellis Island in 1908 "stuck to the bottom of the pot"?
cans are not new arrivals on the American continent. They are simply
bio-socially lower in rank. If Germans preceded Irish and Irish preceded
Italians in achieving middle-class status in urban America, that is not
primarily a statement of immigrant history, but rather one of racist
preference.
Nor is any theory of racial or genetic disability necessary to explain
the differential distribution of ethnic group members in American sOci-
ety, or their differential performances in school, once we understand that
we are looking at a mass system programmed to provide unequal access.
Indeed such theories are pitifully irrelevant and unprovable until that
timeour society does provide equal treatment for individuals of
diverse backgrounds and talents. This it has never yet done.
Then what of the theory of the melting pot? This notioncan only
persist as long as Americans focus only on the dominant society, the
middle and upper classes. There, it is true, a predominantly Anglo-
Saxon and North European society has been leavened by those individu-
als who, as the product of exceptional effort and special circumstance,


[Page 30]
b.*
12TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
provide the individual exceptions, and by those members of ethnic
groups which were allowed entry into the dominant mainaream. But the
notion of the mel ling pot ignores that half of our society which has never
been melted in, but rather, as Reverend Jesse Jackson once remarked,
has stuck to the bottom of the pot. Most Americans are now aware of
the presence of so-called racial minorities in large numbers at the bot-
tom of our society. Most of us are less aware of the large numbers of
unassimilated or partially assimilated Whites, often still European in
language and values, who exist in our urban centers, and the large
numbers of rural Whites on the lower rungs of our social ladder. These
too, to one degree or another, are social rejects, serving the dominant
.society as scapegoats when needed, whether as "hardhats," "polacks,"
"okies," "arkies," "hillbillies," or "poor white trash," but otherwise
ignored. They demonstrate clearly enough that even with all or most of
the racially desired traits, cultural failures to conform may spell perma-
nent social inadmissibility into middle-class ranks.
No better set of cultural data exists, for the confirmation of this
exposition of American ideology, than the content of the American
public school curriculum. An examination of this curriculum reveals not
only the operation of the mythology, but at once the function of the
public schools in its definition and perpetuation, its transmittal to the
young. For the last hundred years at least, school texts, in picture and
story, in history and literature, have presented this myth to the young.
The actors in these texts have been and still are almost exclusively
members of the dominant society, Anglo-Saxon, White, English-speak-
ing, depicted with dress, manners, customs and family roles all deemed
acceptably middle class. In those cases where it is essential to refer to
and explain the existence of ethnic differences, reference is made to the
myth of equal opportunity and the melting pot, or for those at the
bottom, assurance is given that the lower orders are happy in their
places, the slave on the plantation, the worker in the factory, the Indian
roving his reservation.
This curriculum makes a loud and important statement to every child
who is subjected to public education, a statement with a double edge.
On the one hand it presents him with a model to which he must try to
conform, a Uniform Code of Success. It tells him that in order to enter
the dominant middle class, he must acquire those characteristics pre-
sented by the happy family in the little white house in the suburbs. But it
tells him more than that. It informs him that he must abandon whatever
differences he possess-s, whatever ethnic identity that has characterized
his home and family, if he hopes to succeed. That heritage, says the
curriculum, is irrelevant. It was never a result of accident or oversight
that text and lesson designed by the dominant elite omitted the existence


[Page 31]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism13
of cultural diversity. Rather, it was and is an intentional and necessary
assertion that any such divergence from middle-class homogeneity is
unacceptable, and therefore philosophically simply nonexistent. A text-
book is a philosophical statement.
In their study of formal education on the Pine Ridge Sioux reserva-
tion by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Wax, Wax and Dumont described
the "vacuum ideology" which pervaded the school administration. By
this term they referred to the assumption held by school personnel that
Indian homes and minds were essentially empty, lacking in pattern,
tradition or value, in short, cultureless. The authors give many examples
of that ideology in the words of school officials. One will suffice here:
His home has no books, no magazines, radio, television, newspa-
pers; it's empty! He comes into the school and we have to leach
him everything.'
Urban readers will recognize this as but another version of the notion of
the "culturally deprived," as the authors remark. They suggest that this
ideology functions as a rationalization for educational failure. Undoubt-
edly this is so. But the point made here is that the primary function of
this concept, whether applied to reservation Indians, urban Blacks, or
others, is both older and deeper. It is to teach the student that nothing
which he brings to the school, none of his sociocultural heritage, mat-
ters. It is evident not only in curriculum but in many other aspects of
school structure and operation that educational institutions are, and
have been for some time, the major agencies in this society engaged in
the planned denial of cultural pluralism in America.
Another message is implicit in this curriculum. Of all the children
exposed to the presented model, holding it as a mirror before them-
selves, their families and their communities, some must conclude that
they can never fully conform, never fully achieve consonance with the
ideal. For at least the biological aspects of the model are largely unalter-
able. Consequently, these children are informed of their future status.
They are told that their success can only be partial, their rank always
less, however successful they may be in the adoption of behaviors and
attitudes and linguistic norms. And this, too, is a function of the curricu-
lum, to preserve the racial and ethnic status quo, to inform those who
are unacceptable that their aspirations must be limited, that they must
resign themselves to their group fates. The content of the curriculum, in
cooperation with many other parts of the school system, carries out the
two major functions of schools, inculcating in the majority of its pupils
an acceptance of the American social system, building into them enough
allegiance that they will take their places in the employed and employa-
ble lower classes as loyal and manipulable citizens, and selecting for


[Page 32]
14TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
upward mobility those few who are acceptable and needed, those "out-
standing exceptions" who will be pointed out as demonstrations of the
validity of the school's ideology.
I have said that the school demands of the pupil a denial of his
heritage, if he is to succeed in American terms. This has important
consequences for the personalities and life histories of futuremembers of
the middle class.
One's ethnic heritage is of course imbibed at home, in one's family
and local community. It is transmitted primarily through ties of kinship,
secondarily through those of peer group and ethnic grout loyalty. These
are, of course, the earliest, most profound andaffect-laden interactive
networks of the young child. But the American ideology emphasizes
personal, individual success, as we have seen, and it does so for a
functionally significant reason. To succeed, to move into the dominant
class, the individual must abandon most of the cultural traits of his
home, except for those few, stripped of all real symbolic significance,
which the dominant society deems tolerable. Those behaviors, values
and attitudes which he must abandon are those emotionally imbedded,
acquired as they were in the context of infancy and early childhood. To
do so, he must disrupt his ties to his group of origin. What is demanded,
then, is a rejection of his affiliation with kin and community, of his ties
to his group of birth. What this means is a rejection ofthose emotional
bonds with family and community which would compete with his loyal-
ties to the dominant society. And this rejection is demanded of all
Americans not already born into the middle class.
When we recall that most adult members of the middle class living
today either went through this experience themselves, or are the sons
and daughters of those who did so, we begin to understand theimpor-
tance of this personal experience in the shaping of Americansociety.
Terms such as "fink" and "tom" are much abused and certainly contain
a large amount of viciousness. But they contain a coreof valid sociologi-
cal meaning, which refers to the process of alienation demanded of the
upwardly mobile American. The "fink" as a social type may well be a
peculiarly American creation, a creation in which the schools have
played a major role.
The betrayal of the family is an essential prerequisite for American
success. It should come as no surprise, then,that recent research on the
Black family reveals that those Black youths who reject their parents
have greater chances of future success.' Yet there is, strikingly, nothing
in our mythology, and little in American literary or sociological dia-
logue, which recognizes and attempts to deal with this incrediblypainful
experience. And certainly nothing in the school curriculum. Rather, we
seem engaged in a mass repression of amajor personal trauma, which


[Page 33]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism15
only those, mostly of the younger generation, who are born into the
middle class have been spared.
A choice thus confronts most American pupils from the moment they
enter the classroom. Either they must betray family and heritage or they
must settle for socioeconomic failure. How students respond to this
crucial set of alternatives is, I believe, the most significant determinant
of school performance, far outweighing such other variablesas innate
ability, linguistic background and pre-school environment. This choice
forced upon the child clarifies the dropout phenomenon as a response to
the educational process. The individual dropout is one who has refused
to engage in the process of self-alienation. The reasons for such a
decision are surely many. Some individuals are more likely than others
to feel the demand for conformity as a personal violation. Some, with
stronger family ties, may find it less easy to reject them. And of course
the aspirations and rank of parents influence the degree of rejection
demanded of the child. Some young people, involved more fully in the
life of the community, may perceive earlier than others the degree to
which the promised success will be ephemeral or unlikely. These, then,
refuse, and state their refusal by withdrawing from the scene ofemo-
tional and philosophical conflict. This is, of course, an interactive pro-
cess. The school communicates to the student the consequences of his
failure, and he receives the message. "Pushout" is, as others havesug-
gested, closer to the truth.
Are notions of genetic inferiority, or of cultural deprivation required,
then, to explain the fact that those most biologically and culturally
different from the middle-class ideal have the highest dropout rates?
That is as is intended. Through this process the school stampsupon such
individuals the label, usually irreversible, "unfit for upward mobility."
Those who cannot content themselves with this label and its socioeco-
nomic consequences will be dealt with by those other institutions of
social control which take over where the school leaves off: the welfare
agencies, the, police and the prisons. The school can do nomore for
them.
American character structure, then, has its roots not only in the
general qualities of mass society but in the specific nature of U.S.
history. This character structure and its origins have significant implica-
tions for the functioning and personnel of the public schoolsystem.
Teachers, of course, are crucial to th., resocialization process for which
the schools are designed, since it is they who have most directcontact
with the subjects of that process, who most directly present the modelto
them. Teacher recruitment methods must therefore identify and select
those individuals who can be certified as trustworthy in the enactment
and propagation of the American ideology. And so they do. It isnot


[Page 34]
I
0
.:1.4,,, ,?,4',. *,
71
.""I`tertz,
4,^
141,,'q Ntf
"::*)
{1.1
1F4`,,61,./:,4,7444AdixqiK}A,44,44+44 4,w,,,,k1IniUrtfAIL*11:446.04%,.0441,..W.1.4.4.X..1.,N.1.11w.Y.I.1,l, ge,,....txxxxxxxx.xixxxxxxxxx4xxx4txxxXoxxxcitxra41


[Page 35]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism17
accidental that teacher recruitment has always placed as much if not
more emphasis on comportment, dress, speech, morality and manners,
even on politics and hobbies, than on educational qualifications. These
are far more important to the task at hand than any educational creden-
tials, for the primary task, as we have seen, is not education but resocial-
ization.
As the first significant individual with whom the child interacts, be-
yond the family and community, the teacher remains for many succeed-
ing years one of the three most significant classes of individuals in
interaction with the child, predictably in conflict in most cases with
family and peers. Teachers are the primary and in many cases the only
models presented to the child as representatives of the end result of the
socialization process which he is to undergo. The uniformity of teacher
personnel is thus a far more necessary and significant part of their role
than what they do within the classroom. They communicate to the child,
in cooperation with the curriculum, what he must be in order to succeed.
This person, this speech, these manners and values, this appearance are
the marks and means of success. That teachers of early grades have been
largely women is perhaps not so much related to the needs of early child
care as we might think. What better design than to present to the child a
surrogate mother, to whom he can shift his allegiance while abandoning
his allegiance to his true mother, if the purpose of the classroom is
resocialization?
It has long been recognized that teaching is an important avenue of
entry into the middle class, and that most teachers are recruited from the
upper lower class and the lower middle class into the profession. This
too is functionally important, because it guarantees loyalty to the newly
won, and never fully secure status. In fact the general financial and
status insecurity of teachers throughout the history of public education
may be an important part of this structure. Members of the profession
can be relied on neither to examine nor to question the purposes of the
school, certainly not to explicate to their-students the process of resocial-
ization involved or to relate their own painful experience of rejection to
the task in which they are engaged. Given middle-class status on the
basis of a new and painfully acquired conformity, they have too much to
lose.
A quality of educational institutions often commented upon, which
may be termed the personality of the institution, is surely related to the
character of its teacher personnel. I refer to the aura of rosiness, of
unreal prettiness and cuteness which so often pervades the school. Not
only in the area of social relations has our curriculum traditionally
denied the ugly truths of life. The painful, the brutal, the existence of
conflict and evil have been rooted out of the standard curriculum,


[Page 36]
1=-4airatfe-t-i,
"A school free of ethnocentrism
and racism must be a school new in
function, profoundly new."
whether in literature, history, biology, geography or social studies.
Surely we may ask whether there is not some relation between the rosy
utopia of smiling faces which the school projects, and the function of the
classroom as a place in which the student is initiated into the most
traumatic social conflict of his early life.
The analysis of the schools outlined above has concentrated on the
content of curriculum and on teacher personnel. It could be extended
greatly. Teacher training, recruitment of personnel into administrative
roles, the training and functions of counselors, systems of tracking and
other methods of student classification, teaching methods, systems of
accountability, disciplinary procedures and the operation of truancy
laws, even the design and arrangement of classrooms and the architec-
ture of schools ... all these contribute their part to a total system
designed for the purposes described above. The moral is clear. If we are
to root out racism from the schools, and introduce an awareness of
ethnic diversity, we must recognize that we are engaged in what is,
historically, a subversive task. While some school systems have declared
in favor of major reform, most have not, and we will fail in effectiveness
if we underestimate the overwhelming weight of the structure which we
are opposing. A school free of ethnocentrism and racism must be a
school new in function, profoundly new.
An evaluation of current attempts at reform is revealing. Most recent
18


[Page 37]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism19
reforms designed to eliminate cultural and racial bias have lacked a
foundation in an adequate understanding of the role of that bias in the
public school system, and in society as a whole. They have resulted,
mostly, in merely minor adjustments in the message of the schools. Most
such reforms seem to be modifications of the racial uniformity of the
success models presented to the child. This has been done most com-
monly through revision of text materials, and through increased recruit-
ment of minority staff members. Most textual changes of commercial
publishers have substituted only biological, not cultural variety. Dick
and Jane in blackface or brownface retain all the usual middle-class
social and behavioral traits. This, of course, is not cultural pluralism at
all, but a reiteration of the old ideology that one can succeedeven
thoughpossessed,of deviant biological traits, if one adopts the requisite
culture. None of the problems of cultural diversity, alienation and eth-
nocentrism discussed above have been recognized here.
This is not to minimize the important gains that may be reflected in
the presentation of a black or brown or yellow middle class, if that is
indeed an accurate reflection of a new reality. That those who have been
willing and able to conform culturally and socially have been denied
admission on the basis of racial traits is certainly a large part of the
problem, that part most correctly referred to as racism. But it ignores the
larger problem of the irrelevance of cultural pluralism to theconcerns of
the dominant society, and the consequent violations of generations of
ethnically diverse students.
A similar school response to the demands of minority groups isseen
in the inclusion of new minority heroes in the pantheon of leadersto
whom the school child is exposed, and whom he is taught torevere.
Martin Luther King now appears on the classroom wall and in the
calendar, along with Washington and Lincoln. Again, there is no doubt
that this change is beneficial for the self-respect of minority students,
and for the enlarged comprehension of Whites. Whatconcerns me is
that it may become merely an extension of the old deception. Those
"successes" admitted to the list of American culture heroes are precisely
those who conformed to middle-class standards of behavior. Theirpres-
ence again tells the student what he must do, and what a limited range
of alternatives there exists, in order for him to succeed... even as a civil
rights leader! Most aspects of his cultural and historical heritage and his
personal life experience still have no place in school or society. Signifi-
cant by their absence are those ethnic group heroes whose concern for
social justice was expressed through other than middle-class means,or
included a demand for recognition of their distinctive backgrounds.
Even more significantly omitted are all those whose heroism consisted of
a determination to survive and preserve their individual dignities in the
...
9


[Page 38]
20TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
face of a total society dedicated to the denial of their self-respect. Julian
Bond was once asked whom he considered the greatest Blackman alive.
He replied, "The greatest black man alive today is aman of indetermi-
nate age, with or without a family, with or without gainful employment,
with or without any prospect for a future brighter than his past, who
manages yet to wake up every morning with the notion that another day
must be endured." This response extends to all minority members and to
all those living in poverty in this country.
If the traditional family structures, roles, behaviors, religious beliefs
and other values of American ethnic communities are absent from most
schools, equally missing are the folk literatures, arts and music of all
these croups, which have given expression to their experiences. A large
part of these cultural expressions deals with the experiences of poverty,
discrimination, inter-group conflict and pressures for conformity. They
form a peculiarly American record of suffering, of which the blues is the
foremost but by no means the only example. They form the true correc-
tive to the unreal blandness, the dishonest sweetness of the traditional
classroom. Until this experience enters the schools as a significant Amer-
ican record, students will continue to lack the means of relating them-
selves and their backgrounds to the goals of formal education. Their
feelings of irrelevance and alienation will not disappear until the school
positively and consciously validates their life styles and histories in this
way.
Teachers may naturally fear the introduction of such matters into the
curriculum. They know intuitively that to recognize is to sanction, and
fear that in sanctioning these diverse cultural backgrounds they will
imply an abandonment of all the standards and goals they haveset
themselves, to provide students with the skills necessary for effective
functioning in the dominant society. This is not so. Rather, teachers will
be forced to question which aspects of school indoctrinationare truly
necessary and appropriate, which goals are valid, and which constitute
merely coercive demands for needless conformity. They will also find
that students do not have the anticipated difficulty in moving between
two cultural contexts, the school and the home, as long as both of these
contexts are recognized as in some sense real and true. Americans have
been engaging in what linguists refer to as "style-switching" fora long
time. If they have not all been as effective at it as they might beor as the
school has wished, that is because they have heard, and correctly, that
the adoption of a new life style implied a derogation of the old. If
teachers can trust this, can dare to engage in this experiment, they will
discover that clear gains in student performance will beone of the
significant outcomes.
How is this to be done? On what resources can teachers call, to relate


[Page 39]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism21
their classroom goals to the cultural pluralism of their students and their
students' communities? I wish to suggest that teachers have available to
them, and must begin to use, four types of resources. That which has
received' most attention is of course the use of curricular materials,
especially texts. While an important resource that needs further develop-
ment, I believe that it is neither the most important nor the easiest for
teachers to utilize. Teachers have regrettably little control over their
curricular materials. Our discussion does underline the need for vigorous
teacher demand for more acc'irate representations of ethnic history and
culture in reading materials and other areas. It emphasizes the impor-
tance of pressure which has begun in some areas to end state control of
text selection and allow increased teacher freedom in the selection and
development of materials relevant to the needs of their classes. But I
think that this area is least likely to undergo rapid reform. Lack of
teacher influence over commercial textbook publishers is only part of
the problem. With inadequate knowledge of the specific ethnic cultures
and histories of this society, and this is true of all of us, teachers are
greatly overburdened by the demand that they reeducate themselves and
familiarize themselves with available materials. Without some more
effective system of teacher leaves, and opportunities for retraining and
redesign of curriculum than most teachers are provided, the pressures of
time and job militate against any rapid improvements here.
There are, however, three other resources available to the teacher
which, though largely ignored in most school systems, are far more
readily available and more easily utilized. They are the students, the
members of the local communities, and the teacher herself. The success
and power of methods which recognize within the classroom the realities
of the student's life, his fears and hopes and obsessions, have been
recorded many times since Sylvia Ashton-Warner first presented her
method of organic reading and writing.' The work of Herbert Kohl is an
outstanding examples But perhaps it has not always been clear to the
teaching profession that such methods are not merely techniques for the
teaching of reading and writing skills, or of literature..They are methods
of relating the student's own life concerns and life style to all class
activities, and as such, they convey to the student that the classroom is a
place where he can learn to express, understand and evaluate the per-
sonal and social facts of his existence. What I propose, then, is not just
organic reading and writing, but a total system of organic learning, in
which students continually project into the claSsroom and into the
curriculum those events and selves, those problems and conflicts which
they need to master, while the teacher continually guides them in the
direction of a more general recognition of the historic roots and the wid.
implications of their personal concerns.


[Page 40]
"Parents, grandparents and other community members as resource persons can speak
with ri'rn';..ion of life."


[Page 41]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism23
In school districts characterized by ethnic diversity, the use of student
generated concerns and the discussion of student experience within the
classroom has an added power. It forces all students to focus on each
other's ethnic identities and their consequences. By so doing, the class-
room demonstrates that respect for diversity which it wishes to teach the
students. But even in schools not populated by such diversity in the
usual sense of the term, there is greater opportunity than is usually
recognized to achieve the same goal. As has been remarked, the unac-
knowledged diversity within the dominant, largely White, society is
great. The same is true of communities classified by the dominant
society as containing a single "minority" group. It is through an explora-
tion of these individual flies that the student can lay the groundwork for
the understanding of ethnic communities and histories other than his
own.
But the social fates of America's ethnic communities are manifested
far more clearly in the lives of their adult members than in their chil-
dren. These adults have a role to play equally important, perhaps more
so, than the role of paraprofessional aide. In fact much of the success of
some paraprofessional programs may be due to the subtle ways in which
adult community members play this role. Brought into the classroom as
representatives of the American experience, they can communicate to
students the extent of diversity and the consequences of it in vivid and
meaningful ways. Parents, grandparents and other community members
as resource persons can speak with conviction of life inural communi-
ties, recent urban migrations, dustbowls and detention camps, the mean-
ing of the ghetto and the slum, and of the ways in which individual and
group have retained loyalty and identity through language, religion and
custom. I do not mean to underestimate the difficulties which will have
to be overcome in such attempts to involve community resource people
in the classroom. Centuries of distrust may have to be overcome, for
most Americans have a justified suspicion that little which goes on in the
classroom reflects their own concerns. These suspicions will not be
overcome by teachers lacking in a deep sense of respect for others, nor
those fearful of confronting the tragedy of the American condition. But
those who succeed will do a major service in reducing the alienation of
school from community. They will, likewise, do something to bridge the
gap between generations in this country. A good part of the American
saga still lives in the memories of older Americans. Their alienation is in
part a product of their conviction that that saga is irrelevant to the lives
and identities of the young.
Finally and most critically, there is the teacher, who paradoxically
becomes the single most reliable and available resource person in the
classroom. For if teachers as finished products have often been distress-
ingly uniform in appearance, behaviors and values, our backgrounds are


[Page 42]
24TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
not. Coming as we do from a range of ethnic and cultural identities, and
by the mere fact of recruitment primarily from the lower and lower
middle classes, we have available to us, however forgotten, repressed or
ignored, the experiences of self and family in the context of pressure for
assimilation and upward mobility which are the subject of this essay.
When teachers begin to recognize that their own ethnic heritages are
valuable, that their own family histories are relevant to learning and
teaching, the battle is half won. Indeed, I am convinced that without this
recognition and acceptance of self, the teacher will remain unable to
communicate to his classto the surrounding community the respect
necessary for the creation of contact between life and learning. Respect
flows from empathy (and is not to be confused with approval, as we
Americans sometimes do). But the very nature of the processes of
teacher selection and pressures for teacher conformity have tended to
reduce the qualities of empathy and respect in traditional classrooms.
Without them, the teaching of cultural pluralism will remain artificial
and ineffective. Only through the recognition of his or her own alien-
ation, his own family tragedies and achievements, can the teacher make
valid contact with those of others.
Using these resources, each teacher may begin to create, in that-small
sphere in which he or she is influential, a series of intercultural transac-
tions, in which teacher and students begin to define with and for each
other the significance of their lives and histories. So doing, each teacher
serves as a translator and guide, assisting students with the aid of their
communities to a. comprehensionoftin value of formal learning, of all
the technical and analytic skills which the school has to offer, for the
acquisition of a more powerful and broader understanding of their place
America, of t' - contexts and causes of their own fates, and ultimately
of the possibiliand the means for change.
In such an intercultural classroom, the students' growing awareness of
cultural pluralism is but the first benefit. Their own comprehension of
the complex realities and problems wl.ich beset this country is a second.
But the third is the creation of a motivation for learning founded hot on
artificial rewards of approval and prestige, but on the discovery of the
relevance of learning to self.
FOOTNOTES
Micl,ael B. Katz,Class, Bureaucracy and Schools: The Illusion of Educational Change
in America(New York: Praeger, 1971), p. 106.
Murra), L. Wax, Rosalie H. Wax and Robert V. Dumont, Jr.,Formal Education in an
American Indian Community,1964. Supplementto Social Problems, Vol. II, No.4
(Spring, 1964), p. 67.
' John H. Scanzoni,The Black Family in Modern Society(Rockleigh, New Jersey: Allyn
and Bacon, 1972).
'Sylvia Ashton-Warner,Teacher(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1963).
Herbert Kohl,Thirty-Six Chiluren(New York: New American Library, 1967).


[Page 43]
Teaching Cultural Pluralism25
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ashton-Warner, Sylvia. Teacher (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1963). Still one of the best
introductions to the organic method of teaching in an intercultural setting, this report on
thi. teaching of English in a New Zealand Maori infant room can be taken as a model
for the use of the method in other cultural settings and in other areas of the curriculum.
Ashton-Warner's approach is in great contrast to most intercultural experiments in this
country, which have tended to prescribe content, and hence to define for the students
their ocin subculture, rather than allowing children to generate' ,ntent out of their own
needs and experiences.
Catro, Janet. "Untapped Verbal Fluency of Black Schoolchildren" in Leacock, Eleanor,
ed. The Culture of Poverty: a Critique (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1971). An honest
and exciting account of an experiment in teaching language skills through the involve-
ment of students, and the students' own subculture, in creative drama, role-playing and
games. This is a clear demonstration that no sacrifice in standards need occur when
teaching standard English through an organic method. Included is the script of one
result of this experiment, a school spring festival involving students and community
members, which can serve as a model for teachers in other schools.
Fuchs, Estelle. Teachers Talk: Views From Inside City Schools (Garden City, New York:
Doubleday & Co., 1969). There are few studies of what the school does to the teacher.
This one focusses on the problems and pre: ures for indoctrination, to which the
beginning teacher is subjected. It should provide both the beginner and the experienced
teacher with an awareness of the dangers of institutionalized educe cnal systems, and of
the possibilities for resistance and reform.
Katz, Michael B. Class, Bureaucracy, and Schools: the Illusion of Educational Change in
America (New York: Praeger, 1971). Like Katz's previous writings, this small book is a
departure from most educational history, because it dares to raise questions about the
covert functions of the institution, rather than accepting its stated ideology as fact.
There is no better introduction for teachers wishing to relate their own current class-
room problems to a historical perspective.
Kohl, Herbert. Thirty-six Children (New York: New American Library, 1967). Kohl's
application of organic teaching methods to a New York ghetto school, though it
concentrates primarily on the teaching of language skills, is an excellent source of ideas
and insights for application to American classrooms.
Kohl, Herbert. The Open Classroom: a Practical Guide to a New Way of Teaching (New
York: The New York Review, 1969). This small Bible for teachers who want to begin to
make teaching a meaningful and creative process is written by one who understands the
constraints and anxieties within which teachers function. A compassionate and coura-
geous guide to the reform of self and classroom.
Rosenfeld, Gerry. "Shut Those Thick Lips"; a Study of Slum School Failure (New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1971). This study of a Harlem ghetto school by a teacher
trained in anthropological analysis provides the best available demonstration of what
social science can offer the individual actively involved in education. Rosenfeld's analy-
sis i'cludes not only the school bureaucracy, but the students, the surrounding commu-
nity, the ideology of the institution and the teacher's own responses to the teaching
situation. Far more than another radical critique or personal account, this book is a
model for those wishing to understand their own schools and students in more meaning-
ful terms than those of traditional ideology or personal outrage.
Wax, Murray L., Wax, Rosalie H. and Dumont, R. V., Jr. Formal Education in an
American Indian Community. Supplement to Social Problems, Vol. II, no. 4 (Spring
1964). An outstanding study of the failure of education for American Indians, this
analysis of the school bureaucracy and the classroom on an Indian reservation identifies
many of the sources of classroom problems in intercultural contexts. Of special value is
the authors' discussion of the "vacuum ideology" of the schools and the students'
response to it.


[Page 44]
1
Geneva Gay
GENEVA GAY is Assistant Professor of Curriculum and Instruction
and Acting Chairman of Afro-American Studies at the University of
Texas at Austin. Professor Gay received her B.A. and M.A. degrees in
social studies and history at the University of Akron, and her Ph.D.
from the University of Texas. Dr. Gay was formerly a high-school social
studies teacher and has participated in NDEA Institutes at Georgetown
and Purdue Universities. She is a member of a number of honorary and
professional organizations, including P11 Alpha Theta, Kappa Delta Pi,
Pi Lambda Theta, and the Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development. Dr. Gay has served as an ethnic studies consultant to a
variety of institutions, including the University of Michigan and the
Texas Education Agency. She is a consultant and coauthor of the Scott,
Foresman elementary social studies series, Investigating Man's World,
and has contributed to the books Language and Cultural Diversity in
American Education and Curricular Concerns in a Revolutionary Era.
Her articles have appeared in Educational Leadership and Texas Out-
look.
26


[Page 45]
GENEVA GAY
2
Racism in America:
Imperatives for
Teaching Ethnic Studies
Introduction
Racism, in all its destructive splendor, permeates every aspect of Ameri-
can life. It is one of the most crucial problems we now encounter.As the
Joint Commission on Mental Health of Children exclaimed:
Racism is the number one public health problem facing America. The
conscious and unconscious attitudes of superiority which permit and
demand that a majority oppress a minority are a clear and present
danger to the mental health of all children and their parents.... Its
destructive effects severely cripple the growth and development of
millions of our citizens, young and old alike. Yearly it directly and
indirectly causes more fatality, disability, and economic loss than any
other single factor.'
It is this White problem which causes the racial strife and polarization
currently plaguing the country, not the Black, Mexican American, Na-
tive American, or Puerto Rican "problem" so often blamed. Schools and
teachers are as guilty of perpetuating this demonic disease as are all
other institutions and individuals actively engaged in practicing "the
American way of life." Until these facts are realized and accepted,
without attempting redemption through rationalization, we can expect
to see little substantive progress toward achieving harmonious racial
relations among the diversified ethnic groups within our culturally plu-
ralistic society. The first step is to understand the realities of what is,
regardless of how ugly and disturbing they may be.
27


[Page 46]
28TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
The study and analysis of racism in America, if seriously and consci-
entiously pursued, should begin witha frame of reference or a mind-set
that is reality-based. Martin Luther King warned that "to live withthe
pretense that racism is a doctrine of a very few is to disarmus in fighting
it frontally as scientifically unsound, morallyrepugnant, and socially
destructive. The prescription for the cure rests with theaccurate diagno-
sis of the disease."2
Teachers and students alike must accept the factand clearlyunder-
stand its implicationsthat the United States is and always has beena
racist society. Although the term "racism" is relativelyrecent, the con-
cept is as old as the nation and is as American as the flag and apple pie.
It is deeply woven into the entire ideological foundations of American
life, and is perpetuated by all of the institutions of the society.Social
studies teachers who wish to dispel myths about America's historyand
culture by "telling it like it was and is" must help their studentsunder-
stand the fact that racism is, unequivocally, an American heritage.
Another "reality" to keep in mind is that racism pervades the whole
society and affects us all. It is hard for most Whites toaccept the fact
that they are racists. This is due in part to the distorted conceptions they
hold about what is meant by racism. They interpret racismto mean such
blatant, bigoted, and extremist behavioras lynchings, night riders,
church bombings, and burning crosseson lawns. Quite the contrary is
true. Some of the most devastating kinds of racism are subtle acts
committed, out of habit, by people who haveno conscious desire or
intent to relegate ethnic minorities to perpetualstates of inferiority,
oppression, and suppression.
Guilt complexes have no useful rc:a in the study of racism. Forone to
parade his guilt feelings about the racist acts he has committed,once
these are exposed, is a waste of time andenergy which serves to no one's
avail. It does nothing constructive towards ridding society ofthis menac-
ing disease or changing the behavior of the individuals ,who spreadit.
Instead, guilt can become an effective scapegoator substitute for real
action. Nor does it help matters to shift the blameto the victimized. The
reality is that racism is created and maintained by Whites,and it is the
Whites who must accept the responsibility for bringingabout change.
Search for a Definition of Racism
Despite the outcries and numerous indictments by ethnicminorities
charging the United States with practicing racism; despitethe retalia-
tions and defensive statements of WASPs; despite the revelationsof
governmental and educational commissionreports; despite the treatises


[Page 48]
)
30 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
of scholars and researchers analyzing the racist nature of the United
States, the meaning of racism remains somewhat vague and ambiguous.
Members of ethnic minorities, who are experts on racism from a practi-
cal and experiential standpoint since they are the recipients of its ill-
effects, are hard-pressed to define it definitively. When asked to define
racism they are quick to respond, "I don't know if I can put it into
words, but I know racism when I see it." Scholars, theoreticians, and
commissioners tend to resort to reporting tettinintly of the victims of
racism, citing examples of discriminatory actions, and the effects of the
disease, instead of defining it in specific, operational terms. And,one is
still left wondering what exactly is this thing called racism.
Definitions of racism are as numerous and varied as are the people
who have studied this social disease. However, several, characteristic
features are recurrent in the various analyses now availableon the
subject. General agreement prevails that racism in America is individual
and institutional; intentional and unintentional; overt and subtle; isan
activity predicated on an idea or an attitude; is insidious and pervasive;
ascribes to the inherent superiority of- Whitesover people of color; is
learned and culturally sanctioned; and involves the exertion ofpower,
authority, and/or control by Whites over other ethnic groups.'
Racism is defined here as any activity, individualor institutional,
deliberate or not, predicated upon a belief in the superiority of Whites
and the inferiority of ethnic minorities, whichserves to maintain White
supremacy through the oppression and subjugation of members of eth-
nic minority groups. It is the extension ofan attitude into an action.
Although the focus of attention is on behavior, attitudesare of crucial
importance for they are the motivational forces which determine the
nature of the actions one takes. If racism is perceived systematically,
attitudes become one of the interdependent elements in theprocess
which culminates in various acts of oppression and repression. Attitudes
and actions are inseparably bound to each other.
Thus, one who believes Native Americans are less civilized than
Whites may be considered by some to be merely prejudiced. However,
his behavior will reflect that belief and therebycarry this attitude be-
yond the realm of mere prejudice. The White housewife who allows her
children to call her Black domestic by her first name is being racist if she
does not extend to her children like prerogatives with members of her
bridge club. Educational institutions are practicing racism when they
prescribe White curricula, and ignore and/or teach distortions about the
cultural experiences of ethnic minorities. Aperson who is apathetic
toward or tolerates the injustices rained upon -minorities by social insti-
tutions is racist by his failure to act. In each of these instancessome
behavioral manifestation is exhibited which succeeds in projecting and


[Page 49]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies31
perpetuating the superiority of "Whiteness." Behavior, in this sense,
encompasses action, inaction, and nonaction.
Kinds of Racism
The idea that racism is insidious and permeates all aspects of Ameri-
can society may cause consternation for many serious students of Amer-
ican culture, and teachers who wish to develop appreciation for cultural
diversity by including systematic analyses of racism as part of their
social studies curricula. How can anyone ever expect to pinpoint ev;
dence of racism or design programs and strategies to combat it if he
must analyze all sectors of society? Is not the task too monumental to be
feasible for any one person to undertake? Procedurally, if we think of
the expressions of racism as falling into three major categories, we have
a frame of reference which will make the task more manageable, if not
easier. We call these individual, institutional, and cultural racism. The
definition suggested above is inclusive of all three.
Individual Racism
Individual racism is in some ways analogous to race prejudice. It is
the belief that ethnic minorities are inferior to Whites because of their
racial ident'ty, and the corresponding behavioral patterns which serve to
perpetuat .1 these attitudes and positions. The "norms" that are used as
evaluative criteria are those ascribed to by White Anglo-Saxon Protes-
tants. Whites are considered superior to Blacks, Mexican Americans,
Native Americans, and Asian Americans in physical, intellectual, moral,
emotional, and cultural traits.
A person who allows his behavior relative to ethnic minority group
members to be determined by stereotypic attitudes and beliefs he holds
toward them is a racist. Such behavior may be covert or overt. Although
covert racism is much harder to detect than overt racism both are
equally destructive to human potential. Thus, the White store clerk who
sees every Black child who enters his place of business as a potential
thief and watches and waits for him to steal something is being racist.
He is acting out the belief that Blacks are by nature dishonest and prone
to thievery. The White citizen who, upon observing a group of White
youth, thinks and/or comments to a companion, "What a nice looking
bunch of kids"; but when he sees a group of Black youth, senses a threat
of impending danger and/or comments, "I wonder what they are up to
now," is being racist. The teacher who expects less performance from
her Black, Chicano, and Puerto Rican students than her White students
is also racist. A belief deeply embedded in her perceptual framework
14


[Page 50]
i
32TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
says that Blacks, Puerto Ricans, and Chicanos, as racial groups, do not
have the same intellectual potentials as Whites. Sheexposes her racism
with such apparently simple and innocent statementsas, "What else can
you expect of them given their poor home environment?" The White
liberal who argues vehemently at rallies for Blacks', Chicanos',and
Native Americans' claims to reparations, yet stands and listens silently
to a friend or Ilia) member's negative racial characterizations of ethnic
minorities without rebuttal, is contributing to individual racism. Simi-
larly, the homeowner in Dallas, Texas, who rushesto sell his house when
a Mexican American moves in next door because the property value will
decline; the parents in Pontiac, Michigan, who shout ugly insultsat
Black youth and burn school buses transporting themto previously all-
White schools; the school teacher who insists that Native American
children cut their hair so that they will look "normal"; the other teacher
who is anxious to teach in Black schools because of her overwhelming
desire to help educate Black youth, yet appeals to her Black fellow
teachers for names of experienced Black "girls"or "gals" that will be
dependable, trustworthy domestics; and the night riders who burn
crosses on people's lawns, are all guilty of committing individual racism.
Institutional Racism
Any institutional activity which creates racial inequalities, and results
in the subordination and oppression of minorities, whether it be inten-
tional or the result of "business as usual," is institutional racism.' Blatant
acts of institutional racism, such as separate educational, social, and
recreational facilities, poll taxes, and literacy tests, have been largely
eliminated as a result of litigations and legislation. It is the subtleacts
remaining that are so debilitating. This form of racism is apparent in all
the major institutionseducational, political, religious, economic, legal,
health and welfare, and communications. These institutionsare created
by individuals for their benefit, and they operate under the auspices of
customs, laws, mores, habits, and other cultural sanctions. Therefore,
institutional racism is an extension of individual racism and indicative of
the racism inherent in the culture.
Institutional racism appears in many forms. Colleges and universities
which proclaim to treat all applicants for admission equally, irrespective
of ethnic identity and judge them on the merits of their qualifications,
yet continue to use standardized tests as the evaluative criteriaare
committing institutional racism. The judicial system whichgrants a
personal bond of $1,000 to a White confessed and thrice-convicted felon
accused of murder, but denies bail to a Blackman accused of selling a


[Page 51]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies33
marihuana cigarette to an undercover agent, and allows a Mexican
American who has been declared mentally incompetent to be tried and
convicted of first degree murder, is guilty of practicing racism. So is the
economic system which lays claim to "free enterprise," but disqualifies
ethnic minorities because of their racial and ethnic identity, and exploits
them as consumers; the communications system which habitually paints
negative stereotypic views of Blacks, Chicanos, and Puerto Ricans in
newspaper reporting and advertising; the political system which spends
billions of dollars annually to put a man on the moon, but allows
poverty and starvation to continue to exist in this land of plenty. Thus,
institutional racism is a "fact of American life," whether committed by
design or effect, by intent or ignorance, by bigotry or naivete. In its
subtle form it is extremely difficult to detect and to determine who is at
fault.
Cultural Racism
A third form of racism is that which involves the elevation of the
White Anglo-Saxon Protestant cultural heritage to a position of superi-
ority over the cultural experiences of ethnic minority groups. It involves
elements of both institutional and individual racism. The idea that
"White is right" prevails in this expression of racism. Only those values,
attitudes, beliefs, traditions, customs, and mores ascribed to by Whites
are considered acceptable and normal prescriptions of behavior. Any-
thing else is labeled deviant, abnormal, degenerate, and pathological. If
this belief were to remain in the realm of attitudes, it would be merely
ethnocentrism. It becomes cultural racism when Whites use power to
perpetuate their cultural heritage and impose it upon others, while at the
same time destroying the culture of ethnic minorities.
Several examples serve to illustrate how racism is deeply entrenched
in the values, language, history, customs, religion, and psychology of
mainstream America. The professed "brotherly love" which is supposed
to transcend racial and ethnic identities to embrace all mankind is
expressed as the "White man's burden," which, in turn, has been used to
rationalize imperialism, slavery, and other kinds of exploitation; the
genocide committed against Native Americans in the name of the mani-
fest destined right of Whites to settle the western frontier; the audacity
of some state legislatures to pass laws making Mexican Americans
White; the portrayal of "Black" in everyday language usage as some-
thing bad, evil, dirty, and undesirable, while "White" connotes purity
and goodness; standards of beauty which glorify white skin, blond hair,
and blue eyes; the statement that Columbus still "discovered" America
even though Native Americans lived here long before his arrival; the


[Page 52]
i
34TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
situations where Africa continues to be remembered as the "dark"
continent and Africans as "primitives," Indians as "savage," and Chi-
nese and Japanese as "dirty and clannish"; the democratic principles of
"equality" and "liberty and justice for all" which did not extend to
Blacks who were held in human bondage, or Japanese placed inconcen-
tration camps; the list of American "heroes" children study in school, all
of whom just happen to be White; and all the national holidays which
pay homage only to Whites and their accomplishments.
These and many other similar attitudes and actions permeate the
totality of the American Experience. They combine to form a value
system that is inherently racist. All major institutions are built upon
these racist ideologies. They, in turn, are responsible for socializing
individuals and transmitting culture, thereby creating individual racism
and perpetuating cultural racism. The result is that over theyears a
complex, interlocking system of racism has evolved which is deeply
ingrained into the entire fabric of America.
Manifestations of Racism
Racism takes many forms. It is evident in the textbooks we read, the
schools we attend, the language we speak, the churches where we go to
worship, the songs we sing, the politics of the nation, the press and
television, the laws of the land, and the day-to-day activities in which we
are involved. It is one of the most distinctive characteristics of American
culture.
A few specific examples of racism in operation are presented below.
They are illustrative of the evidence available documenting the manifold
existence of racism, and are suggested here as a means of further clarify-
ing the operational dynamics of racism. Each of the vignettes presented
herein includes a description of an attitude, behavior, and/or situation
which seems to be harmless, or even complimentary to ethnic minority
groups, and an explanation of the implicit racist messages.
SCENE I
In response to the question, "What are your general attitudes toward
Blacks?", a White college sophomore commented that "There is nothing
wrong with the Black race except that the majority of them will not
accept the standards, rules, and ways given to them by the Whites, and I
do believe these rules are equal and fair for both Black and White."
The racism implicit in this statement is the arrogant assumption
commonly expressed by Whites that they know what is best for Blacks
as well as Chicanos, Native Americans, and Asian Americans. The key
1


[Page 53]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies35
words are "accept" and "given to." This person is expressing a belief in
the superiority of White culture over Black culture, the rightness and
recleenring-qtratities- of White values and norms, and, thus, perpetuating
the image of the "great White father."
SCENE 2
The setting is a conference on bilingual education for Mexican Ameri-
can students. Ms. X has just finished describing the teacher training
program which she helps to direct. She explains that if teachers want to
work effectively with Chicano youth they should learn to speak Spanish
and familiarize themselves with Mexican American culture. She claims
to have accomplished both. The speech ends and discussion begins.
6
Participant A:Asks a question in Spanish.
Ms. X:Answers the question in English.
Participant A:Asks for further clarification, again in Spanish.
Ms. X:Continues to answer in English.
Participant B:Asks Ms. X why she did not respond to the questions in
Spanish.
Ms. X:Explains that since the majority of the people speak and
understand English she wished to reach the greater number.
In this particular instance the audience was comprised largely of
Mexican Americans. They were the majority! Ms. X's apparent over-
sight in view of her avowed sensitivity to cultural diversity and knowl-
edge of Mexican American culture suggests that as far as she was
concerned "White was still right"that is, the numerical turnabout was
itisignfficant. Although temporarily outnumbered, Whites still reigned
supreme, English was superior to Spanish, and the "people" really meant
"Whites."
SCENE 3
A group of students and teachers are attending a meeting in the
library of a large urban high school which was only recently desegre-
gated. The topic of discussion is, "How to Improve Human and Racial
Relations."
Student A (Black):"In class we are made to feel like we weren't even a part
of the group."
Student B (Chicano):"That's right. Teachers ignore our presence and try to
pretend like everything is the same way it was before we
came here."


[Page 54]
36TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Student C (Black):"Yea! When we tell them (teachers) that we are 'Black'
and want to be called 'Black,' they are always talking
about, 'but you aren't really Black. Your skin is brown'
And then when we start discussing Blacks in class, they
start in on 'the Negro problem'always 'the Negro
problem'!"
Teacher:"It makes no difference to me whether my studentsare
black, white, brown, green, red, yellow, or purple. They
are students and I treat them all the same. After all, we
are all human beings. Why can't we forget about color
entirely and just treat each other like human beings?"
The teacher who applauds her immunity to racism with the testimo-
nial that "I see no color. My pupils are all the same to me." should
realize that to her minority students this is a declaration of racism. How
can this teacher, or any teacher for that matter, look at a student and
not see his color? What she is really saying is, "I have been looking at
you all this time and I have never really seen you." Such statements as
"I see no color," "you people," "they," and "them," when used by
Whites in the presence of minorities to refer to other members of that
group, are racist because by not using a definite label they succeed in
depersonalizing and dehumanizing the people, Thereby stripping them of
their concrete identity. They become "things"unnamed objectsin-
stead of people. For the Black student his humanness is inextricably
interwoven into his Blackness, and to deny one is to deny both. The
teacher who is blind and sees no color is also deaf and hearsno differ-
ences. The fact that she limits "Blackness" to color indicates a lack of
insight and sensitivity to the cultural experiences of her students. Both
are racist deeds. Undoubtedly, this teacher, and others like her, will use
their WASP norms to determine instructional processes and selection of
curriculum materials in the classroom. The result is that no attention
will be given to either cultural diversity, cultural relativism, or cultural
pluralism.
SCENE 4
A party of twelve arrives at a restaurant for dinner. The group in-
cludes both men and women, a Black woman, and a "distinguished
guest." Several members of the party are acquainted but others have yet
"For the Black student his humanness is inextricably interwoven into his Blackness,
and to deny one is to deny both."


[Page 56]
38TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
to be introduced. Aster everyone is seated the person (Mr. A) in charge
of planning the event begins to introduce the distinguished guest (Mr. B)
to the rest of the group. He proceeds to introduce each member as he
comes to him. When he gets to the Black member (Ms. X) and those
seated nearest her (Mr. C to the left and Mr. D to the right, both of
whom are White), he says:
Mr. A:"Mr. C, I would like you to meet Mr. B."
Mr. C:"I am honored to meet you Mr. B. I have wanted to for a long time."
Mr. B:"Nice to met. t you, too."
Mr. A:(Skipping over Ws. X.) "Mr. D, may I present Mr. B, the one who ..."
Mr. D:"It's a great pleasure."
Mr. A:(Takes Mr. B, the "distinguished guest," by the arm and begins to
leave.)
Mr. B:"I don't think I have met this 3 oung lady." (Refernng to Ms. X.)
Mr. A:"Oh! I'm so sorry, I forgot. I thought you two already knew each
other."
Three things are too apparent in this incident for Mr. A to have made
a simple mistake or to have forgotten his social graces. First, as he
introduced this particular guest (Mr. B) he did not limit the introduc-
tions to only those present who had never met him before. Second,
everyone was introduced in order of the seating arrangement and the
sequence was never broken until Mr. A got to Ms. X. Third, his explana-
tion is contradictory. How could he "forget" to introduce he1, d at the
same time "think she already knew" the mar!? Why did this mistake,
exception, or confusion ec.:ur with only the Black guest? What Ms. X
heard Mr. A really saying was this racist message: "This honor (being
personally introduced to the distinguished guest) 'c reserved for Whites
only; and I forgot you were even here, or I wish I: forget that you are
here, since you don't count anyway!"
.,CENE 5
Mr. X frequently shops for his wife. Since she uses large amounts of a
particular brand of soup in her cooking, Mr. X often buys it in large
quantities. Two out of three times, as Mr. X goes through the checkout
counter to pay for his purchases, the clerk will say, "This is for the
restaurant, isn't it?"
This statement seems like an innocent query of a friendly and/or
curious clerk. However, implicitly it is a racially-loaded statement. Mr.
X is Chinese. Thus, the underlying message is that "all Chinese are
cooks"!


[Page 57]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies39
SCENE 6
Checking the television weekly prime time programs for something
interesting to watch, the viewer sees a Black man who is the personal
aide of a police chief and a brilliant part-time law student; an infallible
Black policeman; a Black personal secretary to a private detective; a
Black many-talented teacher; a Black mechanical genius who is also an
expert at the art of disguise; and two cunning Black men at a junkyard.
Between shows he may pause to observe this scene:
The popular comedian, Bill Cosby, struggles to climb atop a mouthful of large
white teeth. Having completed this amazing feat, he flashes a wide grin of
victory and proudly announces that he is "Mr. Tooth Decay." Just as he
begins to enjoy his work of spreading cavities, he is confronted by a man-size
tube of Crest toothpaste, with its superior fighting and whitening power. A
fight follows. Cosby loses the battle and is kicked out of the mouth.
The initial reaction to this and other examples of contemporary televi-
sion advertising is appreciation and applause. Finally, the lily-White
image projected by television for so long has been broken! Blacks and
Chicanos can now be seen on commercials and prime time programs.
However, if the viewer looks a little closer, he will find that (1) there are
still very few, if any, Chicanos, Native Americans, and Asian Americans
appearing as regulars in television programming; and (2) while the
number of Blacks appearing on television has increased, the image they
portray has not changed radically from the days of their predecessors
Step'n Fetchit, Bojangles, and Amos and Andy. Their predecessors
"made it" by portraying stereotypic views of Blacks as shuffling, stupid,
superstitious, childlike creatures. Now Peggy ("Mannix"), Barney ("Mis-
sion Impossible"), Linc ("Mod Squad"), Pete ("Room 222"), and Mark
("Ironside") are still loyal and devoted, and serve their masters faith-
fully. The costumes have changed but the roles remain the sameservil-
ity. These Blacks are ro longer stupid, but neither are they "average."
They are-now "superspades." Both portrayals are reflections of the racist
thinking of White Americans about Black Americans. Blacks must be
exceptional in order to receive any resemblance of acceptance in White
society.
The subtle racist message of the commercial described above involv-
ing Bill Cosby is apparent in the symbolism. The Black man as "Mr.
Tooth Decay" suggests that Blackness is evil. The superior strength and
inherent goodness of Whiteness is symbolized by the Crest toothpaste
success in overpowering the menacing threat and the evil of Blackness.


[Page 58]
40TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
SCENE 7
A social studies class is discussing the westward expansion of the
United States. The students ask the question, "What happened to the
Native Americans as White settlers pushed westward?" Reading in their
textbooks they find this description:
For years the Indiana had been driven farther and farther to the west by the
frontier of the white man's civilization. Promises of permanent rights to large
tracts of land were given to many Indian tribes. ... However, the promises
were not kept, and as the Indian lands were gradually used for other purposes,
the Indians themselves were forced into smaller and smaller reservations'
In their supplementary readings they find that Native American chiefs
were often summoned to the nation's capital to discuss treatyrelations
with various presidents of the United States. They find that on one such
occasion, when Shahaka, Chief of the Mandan Indians of Missouri,
visited Thomas Jefferson on December 30, 1806, the President re-
marked:
My friends and children ... we consider ourselves no longer of the old nation
beyond the waters, but as united in one family with our red brothers here....
We are now your fathers; and, you shall not lose by the change.
... remember, then, myadvice, my children, carry it home to your people,
and tell them that from the day that they become all of the same family, from
the day that we become fathers to them all, we wish, as a true father should
do, that we may all live together as one household, and that before they strike
one another, they should go to their father and let him endeavor to make up
the quarrel.
These descriptions of the White man's relations with Native Ameri-
cans reek with racism. In the first passage the phrase, "by the frontiers of
the white man's civilization," is suggestive of manifest destiny. Further-
more, those "unkept promises" were in actuality "broken treaties";
Whites dared to "promise land to the Indians" that was rightfully theirs
anyway; and Indian lands were not "gradually used for other purposes,"
they were taken by Whites. In the second passage Jefferson's words, "my
children" and "we are now your fathers," epitomizes the American
image of "the Great White Father" and the "White Man's Burden"
relative to people of color. Racism is also evident in Jeffemon's refer-
ences to Whites and Native Americans being members of the same
family, while at the same time he instructs Shahaka to go tell "your
people"!
From Red Men Calling on the Great White Father, by Katharine C. Turner. Copy-
right 1951 by the University of Oklahoma Press.


[Page 59]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies41
SCENE 8
Ms. D. enters an expensive jewelry store. As she browses around,a
sales clerk approaches:
Clerk:"Good afternoon. May I help you?"
Ms. D: "I was interested in this ring. May I take a closer look?"
Clerk:"Sure. It's a fine stone. Would you like to purchase it?"
Ms. D: "Well, I don't know.. ."
Clerk:"Do you work?"
Ms. D: "Sure."
Clerk:"Fine. Then we could arrange some easy credit terms for you."
The clerk in this episode makes two assumptions about the customer's
economic status that are typically racist. He assumes that she does not
work (notice he said, "Do you work?" not "Where do you work?") and
that she is incapable of paying for the item in cash (his ready reference
to credit!). His behavior is racist because it is indicative of Whites' belief
that Blacks are lazy (Ms. D is Black!), and the economic exploitation of
Blacks by Whites through the use of "easy credit."
SCENE 9
Every school year hundreds of children across the nationBlack,
Chicano, White, Native American, Asian American, Puerto Rican
assemble in auditoriums on various occasions to pay homage to Ameri-
ca's heroes and heritage. Frequently, the programs begin with the pledge
of allegiance to the flag and the singing of:
...
America! America!
God shed His grace on thee,
And crown thy good with brotherhood,
From sea to shining sea!
0 beautiful for pilgrim feet,.
Whose stern impassioned stress
A thoroughfare for freedom beat
Across the wilderness.
.
O beautiful for heroes proved
In liberating strife,
Who more than self their country loved,
And mercy more than life.
For members of ethnic minority groups America is not nearly as
beautiful as the picture painted in this revered song. Its image has been
blemished too often by racism. Blacks wonder what happened to the


[Page 60]
42TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"brotherhood" when they were enslaved. Native Americans wonder
where was this praised "mercy and love" when they were dying of
starvation and exposure during the "Trail of Tears." Mexican Ameri-
cans wonder about their "heroes" who have been lost forever in the
pages of American history.
These illustrations are but a few of the numerous manifestations of
racism. They are indicative of the categories and kinds of materials
readily available to classroom teachers for their use in helping students
develop skills in detecting and understanding the operations of racism in
its many forms.
Suggestions for Studying Racism
If social studies teachers are to help their students study racism analytically
and systematically, they must begin by creating a state of readiness or frame
of reference that is reality-bound. Both teachers and students must have a
clear understanding of what racism is and what it is not. During this prepara
tory stage students, and teachers alike, must dispel the myth that racism is a
Black, Chicano, or Native American "problem." They must develop "White
consciousness" in the sense of understanding the fact that racism is a "White
problem," and all its implications and ramifications. Whites are the creators
and perpetrators of racism, while ethnic minority group members are the
suffering recipients of its devastating effects. They must understand that
racism flourishes under the auspices and sanctions of America's "demo.
cratic" principles and institutions.
Frequently, racism is confused, and used interchangeably, with prejudice,
stereotypes, and ethnocentrism. These concepts are closely related but they
are not synonymouc. In making distinctions between them and understanding
the interrelationships that do exist, it should help students to know that racism
goes beyond mere attitude or action. It is inclusive of both.
Productive discussions about racism are also hampered by the mistaken
belief that institutions hold a monopoly on the practi :e of racism, or that for a
person to be a racist he must behave in such ways that he obviously means to
do harm to others because of their racial identity. These assumptions are
dangerously misleading and serve only to complicate the task of studying
racism realistically and with an open mind. They are unrealistic because they
ignore another whole dimension of the problem. Some of the most insidious
kinds of racism are committed by individuals who have no conscious intent of
doing harm to ethnic minorities and are totally unaware of what they are doing.
Therefore, during the readiness stages of the instructional process, time


[Page 61]
2
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies43
should be devoted to developing realistic perceptions about racism by bringing
students into confrontation with themselvestheir attitudes, beliefs, and be.
haviorrelative to ethnic minorities. Undoubtedly, they will feel that everyone
else except themselves is racist. Developing skills in values clarification, sys-
tematic analyses, reflective self-analysis, and perceptive awareness through
the use of simulation, role playing, socio-drama, inquiry, and multi-media
materials are useful tools for bringing students to the realization that racism
pervades all of society and affects us all. Teachers must become as actively
involved in reflective self-analyses and the other "awareness" processes as
the students. Both should begin these processes with questions generated by
the examples of racism described above, such as: Have I ever done something
like that? What do I really see, think, and/or feel when I interact with Blacks,
Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, etc. in perton or observe them on television, in
magazines, newspapers, etc.?
It is imperative that both students and teachers understand the differences
'setween absolute reality and perceptual reality if they are to understand the
effects of racism. Absolute reality is that which exists independent of any
exterior forces, such as numerical quantities and material objects. Perceptual
reality is relative to individuals' particular circumstances. What oneperceives
to be true is reality tohim. A White person may say something or do something
which means nothing in particular to him, while to a member of an ethnic
group it is a racially significant message. For example, often teachers, in the
normal course of events, refer to their students as "boys and girls." Black
males respond violently to this usage because, to them, it has all kinds of racial
overtones. It is wise to remember that when a minority student says to a
teacher, "To me, you are a racist," not to dismiss it as untrue or become
defensive because you (the teacher) have been accused unjustly of a crime you
did not commit. Rather, explore with him, "What do you mean?"; "What have I
done or said to make you think that I am racist?"; then explain that "I didn't
know that I was doing that," and "When I said/did..., to me it meant. .."
Once the students are no longer threatened by the mere mention of the word
"racism," the classroom atmosphere is conducive to open discussion, and the
group has agreed upon an operational definition, they are ready to pursue the
study of racism in depth. The following suggestions are specific techniques or
activities social studies teachers can use to facilitate the fzther development
of students' conceptual knowledge and application of their analytical skills in
studying racism:
1. Compile a list of criteria to be used in detecting racism in individuals,
institutions, and American culture.
2. Have students view their own classrooms and teachers as fields of study.
The students would function similarly to anthropologists who do research
by becoming participant-observers in their field of study. They would study
the classroom for evidence of racism by looking specifically at attitudes and
actions of teachers and students, and classroom activities.


[Page 62]
Ark
44TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
3. Compile a list of questions to be asked about specific institutions to deter-
mine if there is evidence of racism. These lists would vary with institutions,
but some may be general enough to apply to all institutions. Included would
be such -questions as: How many minority group members are included?
What positions or jobs do these minorities hold? Is minority representation
in the various aspects of the institutional structure disproportionate to their
number at large?, etc. After the lists have been compiled they can be used
as guidelines to investigate institutional racism.
4. Make a set of criteria for analyzing the content of textbooks. Follow this
exercise through to its ultimate conclusion by finding out whether the
textbooks are racist and producing a different version to correct the mis-
takes or eliminate the racism. For example, one set of criteria may deal
specifically with how textbooks treat Native Americans via pictures and
other graphic illustrations, and choices of words. If the students find the
books to be racist, they can write descriptions of Native Americans' history
and culture which are nonracist. T' is could be done generally or with
specific incidents such as the California Gold Rush, the "Trail of Tears," or
"Custer's Last Stand." The idea here is to tell the story from the Native
Americans' point of view, including what happened and why they believed it
happened. This technique could also be used with other ethnic minori-
tiesthat is, teaching about racism by studying America's history and
culture through the perspectives of the various victimized ethnic groups.
5. Do an analytical study of the English language and how it perpetrates
racism. Look for common expressions that are a part of everyday usage
(e. g., blackball, black cat, blackmail, etc.) and see the images of "black"
and "blackness" they portray., Examine how these portrayals stigmatize
Blacks and contribute to the formation of racial attitudes.
6. Examine newspapers, magazines, and news reporting to see if they treat
information about minorities differently from Whites. Ask such questions
as: Is the ethnic identity of the people generally given? What kind of news
about minorities receives prominence? Is this different from news about
Whites? How is this prominence shown (frequency of reports of crimes as
compared to social items and human interest stories, placement of news
items about ethnic groups in relation to the rest of the news, etc.).
7. Television advertisements, movies, conversational dialogues, and chi!
dren's literature (e.g., "Mother Goose," "Dr. Seuss," etc.) may be exam-
ined similarly to newspapers and magazines. "Black History: Lost, Stolen or
Strayed," a film narrated by Bill Cosby and produced by the Columbia
Broadcasting System, presents an excellent explanation of how movies
have helped to implant stereotypic images of Blacks in the minds of Ameri-
cans. This movie could be a useful training tool to be shown to students
prior to beginning their own analyses.


[Page 63]
t.
".. .teaching about racism by
studying America's history and cul-
ture through the perspectives of the
various victimized ethnic groups."
8. Examine how Amegica's efforts to actualize certain "democratic principles"
affected the conditions of ethnic minority groups. For example:
PrincipleEffect
A. Provide for the nationalRelocation of Japanese
defenseAmericans in 1942
B. Freedom of choiceLaws prohibiting mis-
cegenation
C. Manifest destinyGenocide committed
against Native Americans
D. Equal protection of theJury trials of members
lawsof ethnic minorities
E. Law and orderExcessive police power
for the containment of
ghettos and barrios
9. Use the school as a major case study to examine racism in its many
manifestations. Include analyses of institutional, individual, and cultural
racism all within the context of the school environment:
A. Institutional Racism
1. EducationallyExamine curricular materials and content, grouping
and tracking, intelligence tests, teaching methodologies, etc.
2. EconomicallyDetermine who are the cooks, janitors, administra
tors, counselors. Are there any minority supervisors? How do the
. ,oney and supplies your school receives compare with those of
other schools? Etc.
3. PoliticallyFind out who are the decisionmakers. Who desegre
gates? Who are the administrators and counselors? How are rules
made? Etc.
45


[Page 64]
46TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"Understanding the cultural experiences of America's ethnic minorities and the true
nature of the American Experience is inseparably bound to understanding racism."
4. JusticeExamine disparities in discipline. Who drops out? Who is
expelled? Who enforces rules? Etc.
B. Individual RacismExamine how teachers, administrators, and stu-
dents behave toward minorities, expressions of racial attitudes, who
receives school "honors," etc.
C. Cultural RacismExamine how textbooks treat the cultural experiences
of ethnic minorities. What are the school holidays? What "American
heroes" are honored at assemblies? Whose pictures adorn the halls and
walls of the school? Etc.
Understanding the cultural experiences of America's ethnic minorities and
the true nature of the American Experience is inseparably bound to under-
standing racism. This duality is a prerequisite to effecting behavioral change
so as to create a truly open society that embraces human diversity andcultural
pluralism. Thus, the inclusion of racism in social studies curricula is impera-
tive to achieving relevance and realism, honesty and authenticity in teaching
ethnic minority studies. These should be first among the priorities of social
studies teachers as they strive to help their students become more effectively
functioning citizens and self-actualizing, perceptive individuals in our cultur-
ally pluralistic society.


[Page 65]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies47
FOOTNOTES
' Whitney Young, Jr., Beyond Racism: Building an Open Society (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1969), p. 87.
'Martin Luther King, Jr., Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (New
York: Harper and Row, 1969), p. 97.
' For further information on definitions and analyses of racism see: Stokely Carmichael
and Charles V. Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America (New York:
Vintage Books, 1967); James A. Jones, Prejudice and Racism (Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, 1972); Louis L. Knowles and Kenneth Prewitt, Institutional
Racism in America (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1969); Racism in America and How
to Combat It (Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, January, 1970);
Barry N. Schwartz and Robert Disch, White Racism: Its History, Pathology and Practice
(New York: Dell Publishing Company, 1970); Robert W. Terry, For Whites Only (Grand
Rapids: Eerdman's Publishing Company, 1970).
Terry, For Whites Only, p. 131.
Landis R. Heller, Jr. and Norris W. Potter, One Nation Indivisible, with supplement
(Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, 1968),p. 352. For a summary
analysis of textbooks' treatment of Native Americans see Rupert Costo (Ed.) and Jean-
nette Henry (Writer), Textbooks and the American Indian (San Francisco: The Indian
Historian Press, 1970).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the Amencan West
(New York: Bantam Books, 1970). A history of the genocide committed against Native
Americans by Whites from 1860 to 1890 as seen from the standpoint of the victims. This
author relies heavily upon reports of council discussions and treaty negotiations to
document the incidence of greed and malice inflicted upon Native Americans.
Daniels, Roger and Kitano, Harry H. L. American Racism: Exploration of the Nature of
Prejudice (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1970). This book analyzes the nature of
racism and discusses racist practices inflicted upon different ethnic groups prior to and
after World War 11. Primary attention is focused on the racism experienced by Japanese
Americans. The authors develop their arguments around the premise that "relocation
camps can happen again," and explain why this is conceivable.
Delona, Vine, Jr. Custer Died for Your Sins (New York: Avon Books, 1969). Written bya
Native American, this book examines the myths and stereotypes Whites have built up
about Native Americans; the spheres of influence which manipulate the lives of Native
Americans, especially Congress, churches and social scientists; and the future of "Indian
Affairs."
Jones, James M. Prejudice and Racism (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing Company, 1972). An excellent treatment of racismconcise yet comprehensive.
Well written and vividly illustrated. This book is particularly useful in conceptualizing
racism, definitively and operationally. It offers definitions, illustrations and interpreta-
tions of racism in its various manifestationsindividual, institutional, and cultural. A
must for teaching about and studying racism.
King, Larry L. Confessions of a White Racist (New York: Viking Press, 1969). A personal
expos of one man's awakening to the realization of his own racism, and the enduring
struggle with his conscience to understand the ramifications of it. It is not only about
one man's struggle;it is also about White Americans and their racist attitudes in
general.


[Page 66]
48TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Knowles, Louis L. and Prewat, Kenneth.Institutional Racism in America(Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1969). This book gives an explanation of the ideological roots of
racism in Amenca, and an analysis of the racism perpetrated by political, economical,
legal, religious, health and welfare, and educational institutions. A classic study which
presents descriptive accounts of the operations of racism in these American institutions.
McWilliams, Carey.North horn Mexico: The Spanish-Speaking People of the United
States(New York: Greenwood Press, 1968). This book discusses the cultural heritage,
problems surrounding settlement, myths, and stereotypes about lifestyles, prejudices and
discrimination, and political activism of Mexican Americans of the Southwest. Special
attention is given to Mexican Americans in Texas, New Mexico, and California.
Monte, Anita.Racism(New York: Pocket Books, 1972). One of the volumes in the
Problems of American Society series,this book presents fifteen articles, drawnfroma
wide range of materials, depicting racism in situational contexts. It argues that racism is
the destructive force which is ripping American society apart. Using firsthand accounts
of the victims of racism, it explains how racism has developed and has been reinforced
by institutions. Good resource book for students.
Moore, Joan W.Mexican Americans(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1970). One of the
volumes in theEthnic Groups in American Life Series.The author presents excellent
information on several topics relative to the Mexican American experience in American
life. Among these are White perceptions of Mexican Americans; Amencan institutions
in the Mexican experience; the family, language, culture, and politics of Mexican
Americans.
Schwartz, Barry N. and Disch, Robert.White Racism: Its History, Pathology and Practice
(New York: Dell Publishing Company, 1970). An anthology of historical and contempo-
rary writings which documents the existence of racism. The articles, written byboth
Blacks and Whites, cover a wide range of diversified matenals.
Stalvey, Lois Mark.The Education of a WASP(New York: Bantam Books, 1970). This
book tells the story of the author's awakening to the realities of the extent and depth of
racism in Americansociety.In the process the author examines existing social attitudes
and prejudices, and the platitudes of White liberals.
Steinfield, Melvin.Cracks in the Melting Pot: Racism and Discrimination in American
History(Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press, 1970). This excellent collection of readings is
arranged in such a way as to give an overview of racism in order to create an accurate
perspective, and to provide insights into the racist practices inflicted upon ethnic minor-
ity groups. It provides insights into how racism has influenced, provoked, or encouraged
territorial acquisitions, presidential utterances, immigrationlaws,constitutional crises,
barbaric brutalities, and brought American society to the brink of self-destruction.
Terry, Robert W.For Whites Only(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company,
1970). Terry discusses the racism of White liberals. He suggests "White consciousness"
as an alternative for racism. His major premise is that the race problem is aWhite
problem; rooted in White attitudes and White-controlled institutions. He also discusses
strategies and tactics Whites can use to rid society and themselves of racism.
Wilhelm, Sidney M.Who Needs the Negro?(Garden City: Anchor Books, 1971). The
author argues that Blacks are in danger of being annihilated by Whites since they are no
longer a useful commodity. As long as the presence of Blacks was an economic asset,
they were not in danger of extermination. Now that this is no longer the case, due to
technological advancements, Blacks are perceived as liabilities.
Yette, Samuel F.The Choice: The Issue of Black Survival in America(New York: Berkley
Medallion Books, 1971). Yette argues similarly to Wilhelm that the primary issue facing
Blacks is the question of survival since America has declared them an obsolete people.
He develops his hypothesis by setting forth a series of government measures and
proposals that appear to be leading toward Black genocide. Although the argument may
be somewhat extreme, this bookshould notbe discounted in a thorough analysis of
racism in American society.


[Page 67]
Racism in America: Imperatives for Teaching Ethnic Studies49
Young, Whitney M. Beyond Racism: Building an Open Society (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1968). Young presents a thorough examination of racism in its various manifesta-
tions and proposes an action program that will enable America to become a truly open
society. He also explains why individuals and institutions are mutually responsible for
bringing about change so as to prevent further violent racial crises and confrontations.
Zilversmit, Arthur. Lincoln on Black and White: A Documentary History (Belmont,
California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1971). This collection of readings,one in
the American History Research Series, provides original documents for analyzing Lin-
coln's attitudes toward Blacks. These documents offer a wealth of materials for testing
the hypothesis: "Lincoln was a White supremacist."
4'


[Page 68]
David Ballesteros
t
DAVID BALLESTEROS is Dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at
California State University, Sacramento. Dean Ballesteros holds B.A.
and M.A. degrees in Spanish from Redlands University and Middlebury
College, and a Ph.D. in Latin American Studies from the University of
Southern California.. He is a former high school teacher, and has taught
at California State University, San Diego, Arizona State University, and
the Universities of Oklahoma and Texas. Dean Ballesteros was formerly
the Director of Teacher Corps at the University of Texas at Austin. He
has served as a multicultural education consultant to a number of
institutions, including the Department of Health, Education, and Wel-
fare and the State of California. Dr. Ballesteros was awarded a Spanish
Government Grant in 1957-58, and was a United States Office of Educa-
tion Fellow in 1969-70. His publications include A-LM Guide, Spanish
Level One (coauthor), and articles in Hispania, The National Elemen-
tary Principal and NCRI EEO Newsletter (National Center for Research
and Information on Equal Educational Opportunity). Dean Ballesteros
is a specialist in multicultural education, community-based education,
and the training of teachers. He is active in a number of professional
organizations concerned with the problems of bilingual education, in-
cluding the National Education Task Force de la Raza, and the Associa-
tion of Mexican American Educators.
50


[Page 69]
DAVID BALLESTEROS
Social Justice
and Minorities
3
1976 marks the bicentennial anniversary of the founding of the United
States of America. The founding fathers advocated, promoted, and
insisted that the new Constitution be a document that would bring
freedom, justice, equality, and the pursuit of happiness to its new citi-
zenry. After two hundred years the American dream is far from being
realized, particularly for the minorities. Through economic development
zad land expansion the United States has inherited diverse groups of
people whose potentials and contributions have not yet been recognized.
There are serious problems within our society today. Minority groups
are equated with these problems. Misconception, ignorance, suspicion,
and fear about minority persons prevail. This is why it is so important
that teachers keep constantly aware of cultural and linguistic differences
and promote understanding among their students to lessen these anxi-
eties. The real problem in our society today is not the "Black Problem,"
nor the "Indian Problem," nor the "Mexican American Problem"; it is
the "Anglo Point-of-View Problem." This viewpoint determines what
happens in our schools and communitieswhat emphasis will be given
or denied racial, cultural, and language values.
The late Commissioner of Education, James E. Allen, in a speech on
September 2, 1969, talked about specific steps which communities may
find constructive in dealing with some of the underlying causes of
student unrest. One of the suggested steps included: "The introduction
of Black, Brown, and other ethnic studies into existing courses and
through additional offeringsdeveloped colldooratively by students,
51


[Page 70]
ll
52TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
teachers, and administratorsto increase understanding, rather than
fear, of cultural differences."
When referring to minorities a large percentage of persons think
black. This may be true for a good part of the country, but for other
parts of the United States one must also think brown, red, yellow, white.
And in many cities of the Southwest minorities are brown and nothing
else. There are approximately ten million Spanish-speaking persons in
the United States, two-thirds of whom are Mexican Americans. Mexican
Americans (or Chicanos) are the second largest ethnic minority in the
United States and the largest in the Southwest. Together the Brown and
Black populations make up one-sixth of the total United States popula-
tion and a majority in several major cities, which potentially comprises a
significant political coalition.
Minorities have contributed more than their share in defending our
country in w , -.. The proportion of Blacks and Mexican Americans
drafted during the Vietnam War exceeds that of their numbers in the
general population. During World War II, the Korean War, and in
Vietnam, Blacks, Chicanos,' Indians, and Japanese Amcricans distin-
guished themselves fighting and dying thousands of miles from home.
Perhaps a positive effect of the wars has been the returning of these
veterans, demanding the rights and privileges at home for which they
fought in Europe and Asia. This pursuit of happiness includes decent
housing and job, a more equitable welf.. tt system, participation in the
political and legal processes, a relevant ...,lucation, but above all to be
treated as a bona fide citizen, a person, a human being.
The Cycle of Poverty
No one can say that the problems of the poor have not been re-
searched, studied, examined, handled, committeed, sloganized. There is
hardly a letter of the alphabet that has not been used to form an
abbreviation for an agency. Businesses have invested personnel and
resources on job training programs designed to diminish poverty.
Church groups lave been conspicuous in the attempt to enliven the
conscience of the country about conditions related to poverty and race.
Foundations are encouraging innovative programs to alleviate poverty
and prejudice. But, unfortunately, this activity, this flood of concern
engages but a minute percentage of the total population in the United
States.
There is discrimination in all aspects of employment in both the
public and private sectors. This includes hiring, rate of pay, and oppor-
tunity for promotion. Qualifications and tests for jobs often serve to
eliminate minority workers from jobs which they are capable of per-


[Page 71]
Social Justice and Minorities53
forming, by imposing standards, language, and experience requirements
that are unrealistic and unrelated to the work to be done.
Poverty is not restricted to minorities. There are poor whites in Appa-
lachia and in the cities. But, the majority of persons from minority
gro-ips seems to be caught in this cycle of poverty. A report by the
.ed States Office of Education concerning the urban student and his
environment cites characteristics of homes in which economically disa 1-
vantaged students live:2
1. He and his family are apt to live on a diet which is less than ade-
quateif not insufficient. And he is likely to manifest inadequate
health and energy levels for a sustained effort on demanding tasks,
e.g., reading as taught by the school.
2. He lives in a world in which the mortality rates of women and babies
in birth are higher and the life expectancies of menare lower than for
other Americans.
3. Economically, he lives in a world in which unemployment, underem-
ployment, and the inadequate welfare check are common facts of life.
He learns, too, as his family already has, that his family's economic
status is all too often a direct offshoot of racial discrimination. For
even if he does finish high school or college, he will earn less than his
white counterpart with the same years of schooling.
4. He lives in housing which is apt to bepoor conditionand it may
very likely be overcrowded.
5. His family will probably pay more for this housing than it is worth
simply because there is really nowhere else to go. A new homeor a
better apartment would be out of the question on his family's in-
comequite apart from the discrimination barrier.
6. Within his immediate experience, if not directly within his family,
there may be problems resulting from divorce, separation,or deser-
tion by one or the other of his parents. And, although only touched
upon peripherally or implied, he will probably gain a knowledge of
the problems associated with drug addiction, prostitution, and theft
within his neighborhoodif not within his immediate family.
7. Within his familyand particularly if it is an extended familyhe
will develop a tough self-reliance, learn to cooperate, probablyre-
ceive a prompt reaction in terms of physical discipline for steeping
out of line, tolerate a high degree of noise, and experience consider-
able casualness in terms of daily routine.
8. The concepts, language, and problem-solving techniques he acquires
will be primarily geared to his survival in the neighborhood and the
necessary interactions in and demands of his family.


[Page 72]
"The concepts, language, and problem-solving techniques he acqiiires will be primar-
ily geared to his survival in the neighborhood..."
......


[Page 73]
Social Justice and Minorities55
Being poor is a burden. Being c member of a minority in our society is
a burden. Being a minority and poor is a double burden that few are
able to successfully overcome under present welfare systems. In human
terms this means that a Mexican American woman in West Texas, with
four children at home and a husband in the hospital for a prolonged
stay, has her claim for assistance denied because there is no caseworker
who speaks Spanish and she cannot properly fill out the application
form (in English) with its legalistic terminology. It means that a Black
woman who has had the misfortune to have an illegitimate child must
submit to periodic inconvenient "raids" by welfare officials who search
under the bed for a man in the house. It means that Puerto Rican
familiesinNew York, unaware of the avenues of appeal, receive their
winter clothing allowance in February, after their children have already
missed two months cr school because they have no coats or shoes. It
means that a Black tenant farmer in Mississippi will receive his $60 a
month for his familyifhe does not register to vote, or attend any
political meetings.
It is the favorite game of the "Haves," especially those of conservative
political persuasion, to revile the "Have-nots" and to decry welfare
spending. Some of the more widely accepted myths about Welfare have
been refuted by recent Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
statistics:'
MythWelfare families save lots of children to get more money.
FactA typical family has a mother and three children. She gets $35 extra for
another child.
MythThe rolls are full of able-bodied loafers.
FactLess than 1% are unemployed males.
MythWelfare is only a dole (money).
FactMany services as well as money are given.
MythGive them more money and they'll spend it on beer and cars.
FactMost spend extra money on food, clothes, and better housing.
MythMost welfare children are illegitimate.
FactLess than one-third are born out of wedlock.
MythOnce on welfare, always on welfare.
FactThe average family is on welfare for two years.
MythMost welfare families are Black.
FactOnly 46% are Black.
MythWhy work when you can live it up on welfare?
FactAverage payment for a family of four ranges from$60 a month in
Mississippi t^a high of $375 inAlaska.
In all states payments are below the poverty level.


[Page 74]
56TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Another commonly held myth is that only poor people receive wel-
fare. The fact is that one of the biggest welfare programs in the country
is through the Department of Agriculture which hands out millions of
dollars each year to wealthy farmers and corporations for not growing
crops. Indeed, the farmers' lobby is so strong that the poor are used to
dispose of the agricultural surpluses through the "commodities" pro-
grams. This "in kind" assistance, in lieu of a cash grant, is one more way
in which the dignity inherent in freedom of choice is denied the poor.
How .nany Chicanos would eat that much peanut butter if they had a
choice?
Another myth, widely believed, but which needs closer examination, is
that there is much cheating going on among those who receive welfare.
Of course, there are some who are receiving grants that they are not
entitled to; however, the number of cases and the amount of money
involved is virtually negligible as compared with the misrepresentations
which middle- and upper-class American citizens include in their in-
come tax reports. The amount of money lost to the government through
income tax evasion is many times more than that lost through welfare
cheating, not to mention the number of millionaires in this country who
pay absolutely no tax at all.
Minorities have been increasingly forced to resort to Public Assis-
tance. The Social Security Act, which set up our federal programs of
income maintenance, is primarily based on an insurance concept, tied in
with employment. The major portions which include retirement benefits
(Old Age Survivors and Disability Insurance), Unemployment Insur-
ance, Workmen's Compensation, and Medicare usually work to the
disadvantage of the minority person, since the types of work which he
has been allowed to dodomestic work, farm laborer workhave not
been covered by these benefits. With the advancing technological gains
and high unemployment rate, many find that they are without the
proper training background on which to base future security.
They must then deal with the various welfare officesthose bureau-
cratic nightmares of administrationwhich often are more concerned
with their maze of rules and regulations than with the needs of the
people whom they are serving. The appeals procedure is an example of
this confusion. When an applicant is turned down, or a recipient has aid
terminated or reduced, often through lack of understanding on the
client's part or language barriers, the appeal must be made first of all
through the same office, through the same caseworker, the samc supervi-
sor where th,- "roblem arose in the first place.
The OSP.Economic Opportunity-Legal Aid services made people
aware that they did have rights under the system and pressed for their
claims. As increasing numbers of welfare clients began to realize that


[Page 75]
otaniornmeititsot
.,4,e72.16
,t4.1.r
6.4,41444,4;44441.44144614100
.....414101161142kitilie


[Page 76]
Social Justice and Minorities59
farm workers' movement Chavez has also become the spiritual leader for
the advancement of the Mexican American cause,la causa.
America can certainly give the farm worker the minimum wages, the
unemployment compensation, the health and social benefits, and the
right to negotiate collectively. It is a shame that the hands that labor so
hard to satisfy this abundantly-fed nation are in economic distress, they
themselves lacking the basic staples. Our national poet, Carl Sandburg,
understood the cries of the worker:
Those who have nothing stand in two pressures:
Either what they once had was taken away
or they never had more than subsistence.
From these hands pour a living cargo of overwhelming
plenty from land and mill into the world's markets.
Their pay for this is what is handed them
Or they take no pay at all if the labor market is glutted
next month maybe
next year maybe
the work begins'
There is a growing concern amongla Ramand many others for the
rights, dignity, and freedom of the migrant farm worker. Migrant
needslow income, irregularity of employment, exemption from social
a
.silirMill..


[Page 77]
60 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
legislation, inadequate educationare not seasonal, buta fill -time oper-
ation.
Mexican Nationals take jobs away from United States Mexican
American citizens. This is particularly true of green card holders along
the border towns. The United States government grants them the immi-
gration documents from which they derive the designation "green card-
ers" despite the fact that there is no proof that they intend to establish
residence in this country and, in fact, every evidence that they do not.
There have been many allegations that commuters have been usedas
strike breakers in labor disputes in the United States. And there is
substantial evidence that their daily migration depresseswages and
creates unemployment for Mexican Americans who live along the bor-
der. The United States Attorney General is required by law to_refuse
entry to commuters if domestic workers are available. The evidence
suggests that this law is not enforced. For the United States government
to encourage the commuter practice is simply a failure to take care of its
own people and therefore a failure to do justice to them, and justice is
above charity.
It was the grape boycott that shook the conscience of the plight of the
Mexican farm worker in the rich San Joaquin Valley in California.
Today the grape represents the blood and sweat, the life and bread of
many migrants. It is the grape that unites Chicanos to improve the
economic, educational, and social conditions of la Raza. The signifi-
cance of the grape strike, la huelga, aside from the farm workers' at-
tempt to unionize and to receive equitable pay for their labor, issym-
bolic of the Mexican American quest fora full role in our society.
Along with a new concept of income maintenance for those unableto
support themselves must come greater efforts to aid those workingpoor,
by raising the minimum wage level and enlarging thecoverage to many
of the jobs in which the unskilled worker finds himself. Social Security,
Workmen's Compensation, and Unemployment Benefitsmust be ex-
panded also so that the jobs thatmany minorities have traditionally
been allowed to hold will have the dignity of recognition and worthiness
associated with them.
Legal Rights
"Justice restrained is justice frustrated, justice delayed is justice de-
nied, and justice denied is an abridgment of humanrespect and dignity,
violative of human decency, anda basis for the sowing of distrust,
discord, and a foothold for hate."'
Minorities have always suffered violations of tneir constitutional
rights, and have not had full or readyaccess to all of the processes


[Page 78]
Social Justice and Minorities61
involved in the administration of justice. Recurring complaints are made
with speciP.! frequency by minorities of police brutality, denial of bail,
excessive jai' and prison sentences, harassment in registration to vote
and in voting, exclusion from juries. Minorities do not have sufficient
members of their own groups to represent them before the tribunals of
justice. Therefore, is it any wonder that they have deep mistrust and
suspicion about the administration of justice?
Harassment of Blacks and Chicanos, particularly the young, by po-
lice, rather than physical brutality, is a major conflict in many communi-
ties. A particular problem confronting these youths is the police practice
of arrest on suspicion. This has been described as arresting everyone in
sight or within reach when a crime has been committed. The result of
this is that many young men accumulate long arrest records without ever
having been tried or convicted of a crime. An arrest record, with or
without convictions, is difficult to overcome in educational or employ-
ment opportunities.
Although discrimination in jury selection is prohibited by the Consti-
tution and proscribed by various civil rights acts, violations are still
flagrant today in certain states. Discrimination in jury selection is also
reflected by the jurors themselves. How can juries with only selected
segments of the population be intimately familiar with the conditions of
local minorities and make impartial judgments of their acts? Serving as a
grand or trial juror is the only opportunity most citizens have to partici-
pate actively in the administration of justice. Some say that it is hard to
find "qualified jurors" among minorities (draft boards do not have
trouble finding qualified Blacks and Chicanos to fight in wars). Un-
doubtedly, when the composition of juries changes so will the results. A
jury system is fair only if the jury selection is fair and only if the jury
truly reflects a cross section of the people. When this fails, then the
miscarriages of justice result, such as have been witnessed in the deep
South.
In some areas minorities I:ave testified that their rights to vote have
been compromised by means ranging from outright intimidation to
restrictive laws which make registration difficult. In certain Texas com-
munities, Chicanos described a variety of attempts to lower the Mexican
American turnout. First, elections are held when people are away har-
vesting the crops. They allege that welfare recipients are intimidated,
that police ticket cars for minor defects on election day, and that
election officials attempt to confuse the voters by asking questions like
"Where is your property?" instead of "Where do you live?", thus making
some eligible voters believe they must own property in order to vote.
The Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MAL-
DEF) is a legal organization representing Mexican Americans to bring
about social ci ange through the judicial process. Before its founding,
0


[Page 79]
62TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
only a handful of cases had been tried to adjudicate the constitutional
rights of Mexican Americans. Because few Mexican Americanshave
been in the Courts, the judiciary is not familiar with the social,eco-
nomic, and political problems of this group. So, the task of MALDEF
has been in part to educate the judiciary. Matters litigated byMALDEF
include education, employment, voting rights, police misconduct,media,
immigrants, and farm workers. The inability to communicate between
Spanish-speaking American citizens and English-speaking officials has
complicated the problem of administering justice equitably.
Two extreme examples of violations of constitutional rightsinvolving
United States citizens were (1) during the Great Depression ofthe
thirties, local authorities in the United States organizedand helped
finance the shipment of tens of thousands of Mexican Americans back
to Mexico, as a device to relieve themselves of welfare support andto
ease the terrifying problems of unemployment of domestic workers; (2)
the roundup of Japanese Americans during World War IIand placing
them in relocation camps (a euphemism for concentrationcamps) as a
means to prevent "subversive" activities. Because of tax claims, many
Japanese families never recovered their landupon return. The Japanese
encampment was a reversal of the fundamental premise: innocent until
proven guilty.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) gi: .ranteedproperty, civil
and cultural rights to the Spanish-speakingpersons annexed to the
United States as a result of the United States-Mexicowar. As stipulated
in the treaty, the Mexicans who chose to remain in conqueredterritory
were guaranteed the rightsproperty, political, socialthatare given to
all American citizens. It should never be forgotten that, withe excep-
tion of the Indians, the Mexican Americansare the only minority in the
United States who have been annexed by conquestthe onlyminority,
Indians again excepted, whose rightsare specifically safeguarded by a
written provision.
Under the superior military and political forces of the United States
government, through outright conquest and unenforced treaties, Indians
and Spanish-speaking people in the Southwest have lostvast amounts of
land. Today, nearly four centuries after the Spaniards first settledNew
Mexico, problems growing from land grantsare a source of continuing
controversy, despite efforts for the past 100 years to straighten them out.
Resolutions have been introduced to create a special House Commit-
tee in Congress to investigate land grant claims in the Southwest. The
proposal calls for a "full and complete investigation and studyinto the
legal, political, and diplomatic status of lands whichwere subject to
grants from the King of Spain and from the government of Mexico prior
to the acquisition of the American Southwest as a result of the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo. ""


[Page 80]
"4.6-=4.'4--v.
"The Japanese encampment [during World War II) was a reversal of the fundamental
premise: innocent until proven guilty." Many Japanese-Americans were compelled to
sell their businesses.
The idea of uniting the land grant organizationswith the ultimate
aim of returning all the grant land to its legal ownerscame with the
creation in 1963 of the Alianza Federal de Mercedes led by Reies Lopez
Tijerina. Although the land is the issue, Tijerina's real concernin and
out of prisonhas been poverty, lack of education, discrimination,
denial of civil rights to Spanish-speaking Americans.
Quality Education
Through walkouts, protests, boycotts, and sit-ins, minority students
are demanding a relevant education. What do these students want? They
want an education. They want freedom. They want equality in opportu-
nities. They want books and curriculum revised to include their ethnic
contributions. They want instructors, counselors, and administrators
from the same ethnic background or persons who at least have empathy
63


[Page 81]
64TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
toward their needs. They want quality education, which, after all, is the
stated goal of our educational institutions.
Contributions of the various ethnic groups in this country should be
integrated in all aspects of the school experiences: history, geography,
art, music, literature. Multicultural education means not only the inte-
gration of students and staff but also the integration of the curriculum.
Ethnic studies must not be treated as an isolated program or be taught
only in certain parts of the school year, but should be taught on a
continuing basis to all students.
Parity must have priority in deciding the fate of minority students. In
planning and implementing programs, the community, students, faculty,
and administrators must work together if curriculum is going to be
relevant and viable. The United States Office of Education Urban Edu-
cation Task Force supports the principle that parents and local commu-
nity residents must be participants in the educational process if effective
changes in education are to be achieved in the schools. The role of the
community must be expanded in part because of the relativeires of
school boards, school administrations, and teacher organizati6Jmeet
local educational needs. In addition, the community haslegitimate
role in education decision making on the basis of Amer i,:faditions
and its ability to make valid contributions.
Setting criteria for measuring equal educational opportunity can no
longer be the provinc : of the established "experts." The policy makers
must now listen to those for whom they say they are operating, which
means, of course, that they must be willing to share the powers of policy
making.
Cultural genocide occurs very early in the lives of minority students.
The use of achievement and aptitude tests for selecting people and
sorting them out has persisted down through the years and is unques-
tionably most prevalent in our public school system today--even, of
course, right down to the preschool and kindergarten levels where "read-
iness tests" have become so predominant in delaying the entrance of
children to kindergarten and the first grade. This widespread use of tests
for purposes of selection, for deciding from kindergarten on up who will
succeed and who will fail, is indicative of the kind of competitive culture
that characterizes all of our social institutions, including our schools.
Placement in Educable Mentally Retarded (EMR) and remedial
classes is tantamount to a life sentence of illiteracy and public depen-
dency. We must look into other factors beyond mental ability that might
produce a low test result: poverty, hunger, linguistic and cultural back-
ground, motivational learning styles, psychological effect of poor cloth-
ing and living conditions. It is of paramount importance thatno child be
placed in an EMR class unless it is clear beyond reasonable doubt that


[Page 82]
...
Social Justice and Minorities65
he suffers from an impairment of ability to learn. Until we find better
means of measuring the potential of students or intervene in the admin-
istration of such tests, there should be a moratorium on testing for the
non-English and limited-English-speaking students.
A stereotype by the majority culture can become a tremendously
damaging element for the minority student, since the perpetuated stereo-
type often becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. There is additionally the
danger that the student himself will come to believe the stereotype and
begin to act the assigned role, thus fulfilling his part of the self-fulfilling
prophecy. It is easy to see how a teacher or a counselor who believes a
minority student to be a poor scholar will soon have the student behav-
ing accordingly.
We must become acquainted with institutions and agenciesalong
with their administrative headswhich have long neglected minority
students. In order to effect changes in curriculum it behooves us to
identify our targets:
1. Teacher-training institutions
2. State education departments
3. Teacher certification agencies.
4. Local boards of education
5. Commercial companiestextbooks and tests
Once the decision makers (targets) have been identified, a coalition of
the various ethnic groups and interested groups can perform a very
important service in making demands to implement relevant programs
for minority students.
Puerto Rican and Mexican American students who begin schoo; in
our educational system without speaking English run into the hundreds
of thousands. The trend has been to force these students to repeat grade
levels and to postpone all serious academic work until they learn En-
glish. This latter approach commonly leaves the Spanish-speaking stu-
dent three to five years behind his Anglo counterpart by the time he is a
teenager. The United States Civil Rights Commission report on the
Mexican American states that there is a strong relationship between
grade level repetition and low student achievement. Thus, the State of
Texas, whichAas the highest proportion of grade repetition for Mexican
Americans in the first and fourth 'grades, also has 74 percentthe
highest proportionof Mexican American eighth graders reading below
grade level'
Most Chicano students are still isolated in schools which are predomi-
nantly Mexican American, situations caused by de facto segregation or
gerrymandered school boundaries. While the segregated Anglo Ameri-
can student is equally deprived of a heterogeneous environment which


[Page 83]
is
ta\
.))
--
Minority students "want instructors, counselors, administrators from the same ethnic
background or persons who at least have empathy toward their needs."
could lead to increased educational development, he is rarely confronted
with a school environment which directly rejects the culture of his home
environment: lifestyles, clothing, food, family relationships, holidays,
physical appearances.
The effect of federal, state, and local aid for schooling the disadvan-
taged makes but a small alteration in the basic system of support, which
is unequal to begin with. Perhaps the greatest tragedy in the financial
chain is that, when additional dollars finally filter down to the inner-city
schools, they are often squandered on traditional approaches that have
consistently failed the inner-city student. The record of spending on
compensatory education programsinstead of onenrichment pro-
gramsis an outstanding testimony to the futility of doing more of the
same things that have not worked inthe past. Federal, state, and local
prog. .ns must change institutions, not onlystudents.
Existing teaches-preparation courses have not provided the experi-
ences which will enable a teacher to teachsuccessfully in schools having
66


[Page 84]
Social Justice and Minorities67
predominantly minority students,much less to teach ethnicstudies.
Objectives to better p. epare theteacher to do an effective job with
minority students include:
1. The teacher will come tounrlestand his own attitudes, anxieties,
insecurities, and prejudices through a programof sensitivity develop-
ment.
2. The teacher will understandthe nature of the student'senvironment
and culture (including language)through a program of teacher inter-
action in the school community.
3. The teacher will becomeknowledgeable of learning styles ofhis
students and competent ineffective teaching skills andtechniques.
The notion of cultural superiorityhas seriously harmed theUnited
States in its dealings with othernations. Whereas Europeanstudents
grow up with thenotion of cultural diversityand frequently learn a
,econd and third languagein the course of their formalschooling,
schools in the United Statescommonly isolate-the students fromcultural
excha:. ;e.
The need for recognizing thebilingual-bicultural student as a positive
force in our society is beyondquestion. It is rather paradoxicalthat in
the Southwest some schoolshave forbidden students to speakSpanish,
while at the same time we give lip-...'-e to the wisdom of learning
foreign languages. Millions ofdollais are spent supporting programs
that teach a foreign language tomonolingual English-speaking students
in our schools and colleges.Spanish is one of the more popularelectives.
Bilingual education serves fivepositive put poses for the studentand
the school:ri
1., It reduces retardationthrough ability to learn with themother tongue
immediately.
2. It reinforces the relationsof the stool and thehome through d
common communicationbond.
3. It projects the individualinto an atmosphere of personalidentifica-
tion, self-worth, and achievement.
4. It gives the student a base for successin the field of work.
5. It preserves and enrichesthe cultural and human resourcesof a
people.
We as educators must take apositive approach to see that programs
are designed tomake students succeed, notfail, that programs include
students, not exclude. I am hopingthat in the decade o:" the '70s wewill
begin talking about minoritystudents not as disadvantaged,but as
{


[Page 85]
cultural and linguistic traits. We must institute a philosophy that argues
chapter, it is obvious to the reader that injustices are equally applicable
lum along with social participation activities. In the promotion and
minority groups have made a contribution to this country, and that this
to other minorities in this country.
practice of cultural democracy, we as teachers must make it clear that all
land, our land, was built by many different persons representing distinct
order to succeed in our society, one that argues recognition of the worth
of the individual's heritage, one that respects the value system of his
culture.
that an individual need not lose his identity with his ethnic group in
The examination of social justice should be in the heart of the curricu-
68TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
advantaged, which means that they must be given the opportunity to
develop their full potential within their experience base.
Conclusion
Although I have focused on the case of the Mexican American in this
Awareness and Social Action Questions
Social justicecan be integrated in the various aspects of the curriculum. The
teacher and students can research the problems and assets of minorities,
invite resource persons to the classroom to further aid in urrierstanding our
multicultural society. Students can assess their own behavior to see if it ;s in
line with their own ideals and values. Assignments in the school and commu
nity can help students translate their beliefs into action.
The following are examples of discussion and action questions:
1. Why does it take militant action to fight for one's rights? Can this be done
in a peacefu! manner?
2. React to the statement of the housewife: "If farm workers are paid more, I
will have to pay more for fruits and vegetables."
3. Social injustices may be t.commission or omission; name some books,
periodicals, and Arm in the school library which stereotype minorities..
What social science texts currently used by the school system omit contri
butions of minorities?


[Page 86]
Social Justice and Minorities69
4. Can an ethnic minority candidate win in a predominantly Anglo neighbor.
hood? Are there or have there been minorities elected in your community?
If so, where did their support come from?
5. In many state prisons, e.g., Attica, the inmate population is heavilyminor-
ity, far out of proportion for the state as a whole. What factorsaccount for
this?
6. Is low income the only reason that keeps minorities in ghettos and bar-
rios? Investigate real estate brokers, developers, and financial institutions
in dealing with housing for minorities. Is your .community integrated?
What effect does this have on busing? What aresome alternatives to
busing?
7.It is incongruis that such a rich nation like ours has so many people on
welfare. Invejate practices in the local community that keep people on
welfare. How do other countries handle welfare? Do you know whero the
welfare office is in your city? Who is eligible to receive public assistance in
your state? How do you apply? How much would your family receive each
month if you were on welfare?
8. Are judges appointed or elected in your community, county, state? Ht.w
many are of distinct ethnic groups? What is the practice of grand and petit
jury selection? Obtain the list of jurors within the past year to check for
ethnic minorities.
9. Land expansion by the United States has been done by wars, treaties,
purchases, and outright possession with the resultant action that minon
ties like the Indians and Mexicans have suffered. Under what condition
was the land in your community obtained? Ato were the former owners?
Who owns most of the land now? What percentage of the land is owned by
minorities?
10. How are test results used in your school system.' How do they affect
minority students? What percentage of minority students drops out of
school? What percentage goes to college? Ask the school counselor to talk
to the class about uses of tests and counseling practices among minori-
ties.


[Page 87]
70 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
FOOTNOTES
' Durrug World War 11 and the Korean War, 17 Mexican Americans received the
Congressional Medal of Honor. For more on this subject see Raul Morin, Among the
Valiant (Los Angeles: Borden Publishing Co., 1963).
Task Force on Urban Education, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Office of Education (Washington, D.C.. 1969).
' Findings of the 1971 AFDC Study. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare (Washington, D.C., January, 1972).
'Robert S. Benson and Harold Wolman, Counterbudget, The National Urban Loali-
non. A Blueprint for Changing National Pnorities, 1971-72 (New York: Praeger Publish-
ers, 1971), p. 48.
' Joan Levin Ecklein and Armand Laufer, Community Organizers and Social Planners
(New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and Council on Social Work Education, 1972). p.
34. For more nn Cesar Chavez, see cover story in Time, July 4, 1969.
'Carl Sandburg, excerpt from The 2eople, Yes (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
Inc.). Reprinted with permission.
' Speech by Mario G. Obledo, Mexican Amencan Legal Defense and Educational Fund,
before the Commission on Mexican American Affairs Archdiocese of San Antonio, Uni-
versity of Texas Medical School, September 25, 1971.
' Land Grant Problems in New Mexico (Albuquerque Journal, 1969), p. 23.
' The Unfinished Education, Report II of Mexican American Educational Series, United
States Commission on Civil Rights (Washington, D.C., October, 1971), p. 31.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adoff, Arnold (ed.). Black on Black: Commentaries by Negro Americans. New York: The
Macmillan Company, 1968. Includes penetrating and highly readable analyses by
Blacks of the Amencan racial dilemma. Provoking recommendations for the resolution
of our racial conflicts.
Cahn, Edgar S. Our Brother's Keeper: The Indian in White America. New York: World
Publishing Company, 1969. A series of accounts told by Indians themselves to expose
the shocking economic, political, and cultural exploitation of the first Americans.
Cloward, Richard A.,.and Piven, Frances F. Regulating the Poor: The Functions of Public
Welfare. New York: Pantheon Books, 1971. Authors argue that publ;:. assistance or
"relief' serves the economic and political order so that during periods of mass unem-
ployment and disorder welfare is expanded and during perioe's of stability tne program
is contracted to rush recipients into the labor force.
Committee for Economic Development: A Statement by the Research and F olicy Com-
mittee. Education for the Urban Disadvantaged. New York, New York, 1971. This
policy statement reflects two areas of interest: (a) a concern for the equality and
effectiveness of education and (b) ways of alleviating poverty in the Unitid States,
especially among the urban disadvantaged.
Dorsen, Norman (ed.). The Rights of Americans, What They AreWhat They Shou;c1 Be.
New York: Pantheon Books, 1970. The book's aim is to give the reader a complete
survey of what is currently going on in every area of law that has an effect on personal
freedom.
Douglas, William 0. Points of Rebellion. New York: Random House, 1970. A short,
direct, easy-to-read book by the liberal Justice sr the Supreme Court. Douglas argues
that young people and minorities are right to rise up against widespread poverty,
segregation, inequitable laws, and inadequate education.


[Page 88]
Social Justice and Minorities71
Galarza, Ernesto. Spiders :n the House and Workers in the Field. South Bend: University
of Notre Dame Press. 1970. Documents long drawn out legal battles between Cesar
Chavez Farm Union and grape growers. Study is important to the understanding of
today's farm policies and political manipulations and exploitation ofnot only the
Chicano. but all poor people in America.
Harrington. Michael. The Other America. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1963. Classic work
describes how the poor in the United States are alienate.: and excluded from the
mainstream of American life.
Has lam, G. (ed.). Forgotten Pages of American Literature. New York, Houghton Mifflin
Company. 1970. Literary contributions by writers of various ethnicgroups. Book cor-
rects social injustice of omission of these authors in most American literature texts.
Jackson. George. Soledad Brothers: The Prison Letters of George Jackson. New York:
Bantam Books, 1970. Letters give vivid account of conditions in Soledad State Prison in
California and how the brothers considered themselves political prisoners.
Mexican Americans and the Administration of Justice in the Southwest. Washington,
D.C..: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970. The Commissionon Civil Rights docu-
ments that American citizens of Mexican descent in five southwestern states (Texas.
California. Arizona, Colorado. New Mexico) are being denied equalprotection of the
law in the administration of justice.
National Elementary School Principal. (November, 1970). V. L, No. 2. A special issueon
the education of the Spanish-speaking with articles by leading Mexican American and
Puerto Rican educators.
Ogawa, Dennis. From Japs to Japanese: The Evolution of Japanese-American Stereo-
types. Berkeley. McCatcham Publishing Corpolation, 1971. This work describes the
evolution of attitudes toward Japanese from World War 11 to the present. A delineation
of the stereotypes, an examination of their salient dimensions, andan analysis of their
functions are the primary concern of this work.
Ryan. William. Blaming the Victim. New York: Vintage Books, 1971. This book reveals
how the blame is put on the victims of poverty. instead of the real villains ofour society:
racism and elitism which also affect our so-called liberals.


[Page 89]
re
Barbara A. Sizemore
BARBARA A. SIZEMORE is Associate Secretary of the American
Association of School Administrators, Arlington, Virginia. Ms. Sizemore
received her B.A. and M.A. degrees from Northwestern University in
Latin and Elementary Education. She is currently completing a Ph.D. in
educational administration at the University of Chicago. She is a former
elementary and junior high school teacher, and principal of Forres;ville
High School in Chicago. Ms. Sizemore has been an Instructor at North-
eastern Illinois State University, a Staff Associate at the University of
Chicago, Midwest Administration Center, and Director-District Super-
intendent of the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project in Chicago.
She has spoken at numerous national educational conferences, including
the National Policy Conference on Education for Blacks sponsored by
the Congressional Black Caucus of the United States Congress, and the
Study Commission on Undergraduate Education and the Education of.
Teachers. Ms. Sizemore has served as a consultant to many organiza-
tions, including the Governor's Office of Human Resources (State of
Illinois), and the National Panel on High Schools and Adolescent edu-
cation. Her articles have appeared in Educational Leadership, the Notre
Dame Journal of Education and Phi Delta Kappan. She contributed to
the books Racial Crisis in American Education and Black Self-Concept:
'nplications For Education and Social Science.
72


[Page 90]
BARBARA A. SIZEMORE
Shattering
the Melting Pot Myth
.,.
4
The 1950's brought a non-violent black revolt stimulating all liberty-
loving citizens to support Martin Luther King, Jr., in his attempts to
achieve his dream. The 1960's ushered in black nationalism which rose
from this frustrated drifor equality through integration, and the fiery
oratory of Malcolm X championed a new separatism which summoned
Stokely Carmichael's demand for black power. Black Americawas
spurred to a new understanding of the American dilemma described by
Harold Cruse in this way:
... this dilemma rests on the fact that America which idealizes the rights of
the individual above everything else i:,, in reality, a nation dominated by the
social power of groups, classes, in-groups and cliquesboth ethnic and reli-
gious.'
.
Cruse pointed out that the three main power groupsProtestants, Cath-
olics and Jewsneither wanted nor needed to beco ae integrated with
each other, for their very power resided in the collective strength of the
group.
According to Cruse, black intellectuals and artists had missed the boat
when they allowed the illusion of integration and the individual--,. rsuit
of achievement to blind them to the potential power of the blackmasses.
He attacked the goal of integration, labeling it cultural negation, and
recommended a cultural, economic and political movement as a correc-
tion of this inaccurate conception of reality.
73
Is


[Page 91]
74TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Stating that ethnic groups in the United States constitute a "motley
collection of refugees from Fatherland poverty who worship daily at the
altar of white Anglo-Saxon Protestant superiority," Cruse accused this
Anglo-Saxon ideal of effectively dissuading, crippling and smothering
the development of a democratic cultural pluralism, and questioned the
policy of integration through the imposition of this ideal which stigma-
tized the cultures of other ethnic groups' Called the silent majority,
these "unmeltable ethnics" aroused the national interest in the 1970's
and during the presidential election campaign of 1972. Responding to
their interests, the President emphasized aid to parochial schools, anti-
busing and anti-abortion legislation and strict constructionism.
This chapter contends that ethnic groups do exist and have never
melted. It will attempt to (1) trace the origin of the melting pot and
define the concepts used in these explanations, (2) specify the relation-
ship between the melting pot theory, the capitalistic process and culture,
(3) describe the separatist ethnoreligious models used by excluded
groups to achieve power within the framework of capitalism, and (4)
relate t'slese findings to educational institutions and programs.
The Melting Pot and the Spirit of Capitalism
The melting pot myth emerged from the need to force the many
immigrants into the white Anglo-Saxon Protestant cultural mainstream.
According to Brossard, this need arose out of responses to nativism, the
intense opposition to an internal alien minority group. Nativism stood
for a particular nationalism which affirmed a common American culture
and society and called for a reduction in non-American elements and a
curtailment of foreign domination of American culture and society.' Job
competition stands out as the chief agitator of nativistic movements.
Describing the Irish immigration in Boston, he says that native work:rs
protested against Irish competition and struggled to define what an
American was not."
Brossard asserts that the Irish received a nativist response for seven
basic reasons: (1) their high visibility, (2) their labor concentration, (3)
their preferences for the professional services of their own group, (4)
their magnified native self-consciousness, (5) a collective social prejudice
directed against them, (6) servile notions defining a native American
elite, and (7) their religion' Th! institutionalization of the melting pot
thr ary was necessary in order to destroy competing cultural ideals.
Th next step was legitimation. Berger and I,uckmann define legitima-
tion as the process of explaining anCustifying symbolic universes whicll
are bodies of theoretical tradition that integrate competing meanings
and encompass the institutional order in a symbolic totality.' The Prot-


[Page 92]
r
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth75
estant Ethic and the spirit of capitalism provided the symbolic universe
for the legitimation of the melting pot theory.' It advanced the notion
that individual hard work earned success, and this impulse toward
success must find expression in capitalistic terms.
Based on a philosophy of avarice, the spirit of capitalism promoted
the idea that the individual's duty was to increase his capital. Honesty,
industry, and frugality were virtues in so far as they were useful in this
pursuit. The acceptance of white Anglo-Saxon Protestant ethnocentrism
was the key to access to opportunity. Consequently, individuals from
other ethnic groups believe.'_ that it was necessary to embrace these
values and to conform.' Some changed their names, brokeaway and
dropped all connections with the old ethnic community. But, most
immigrants were excluded from effective participation in the interdepen-
dent competitive model' of capitalism through the economic paradigm
of supply and demand in labor as Brossard has indicated; therefore, the
preservation of the group power was an imperative to maintenance of
the group's gains. Therein lay the contradiction between conformity to
the white Anglo-Saxon Protestant ideal and the preservation of ethnic
differences.
If A represents groups with power and B represents groups withno
power, the social order could be described as one where A has power
over B (A/B). Under capitalism when A wins, B loses and vice versa.'
Inherent in the model there will always be losers. The question, then, is
no: "Will there be unemployment?" but rather "Who will beunem-
ployed?" A's problem is how to keep B powerless, and B's problem is
how to achieve power and parity. Since capitalism required losers, the
myth of the melting pot was necessary to promote the belief in individ-
ual mobility through hard work and competition.
According to Weber," capitalism was encouraged througha new
conception of religioa which taught that the pursuit of wealthwas 4 new
duty. The creed of Calvin changed the moral standards and cc- .,erteda
frailty into an ornament of the spirit, canonizing vicesas ..'onomic
virtues. Capialism was the social counterpart of Calvinist theoi.ot.
Weber explained that the doctrine of predestinationwas the most
characteristic dogma of Calvinistic theology. Somemen were chosen for
eternal grace and others were damned to everlasting death. This inhu-
mane doctrine created a feeling of inner loneliness in the single individ-
ual who was forced to follow his path alone to meeta destiny which had
been decreed for him from eternity. Calvinist th.ology preparedone to
accept this place in the society. The perseverance of the individual ;n
this place and within the limits which God had assigned to himwas a
religious duty.
The individual was forced to attain the goods necessary for survival
r


[Page 93]
76TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
yet to struggle for profit free from the limits set by his needs. These ends
controlled the form and direction of his economic activity. Weber posits
that the capitalistic economy of the present day is an immense cosmos
into which the individual is born, and which presents itself as an unalter-
able order of things in which he must live.It forces the it 'ividual
involved in the system of market relationships to conform to .:apitalistic
ri..les of action. So the earning of more and more money became an end
in itself and man was dominated by it.
However, many new immigrants were Catholic and unencumbered by
the Protestant Ethic. Their ethic was one of intention. A single good or
bad action was credited to the doer determining his temporal and
eternal fate. A man was not an absolutely clearly defined unity to be
judged one way or the other, but his moral life was normally subject to
conflicting motives and his action contradictory. To the Catholic the
absolution of his church was a compensafAlfor his own imperfection."
While the church taught the new immigrants to work hard, to obey the
law, to respect their leaders, and to concentrate on private, familial
relationships, its focus was not upon immediate and intense responsibil-
ity, but upon the long-term. quiet processes of growth. Hence, the
Catholic assertion has been mare conservative, more easygoing with a
tough view of authority."
Other newcomers were Jewish and their religion dictated the preserva-
tion of the highest human values for the sake of God for whom they are
witnc.)ses and for His Law of the world." The committed Jew enters into
a B'rith, the Covenant, the partnership with God. The Talmud teaches
that God has provided legitimate pleasures for man's enjoyment, and
God will hold man strictly accountable for every one which he has
ungratefully declined." The Jewish ethic is characterized by a deep love
for personal freedom, a fierce trust in the goodness of human nature left
to itself and unimpeded by governments, a longing for a socialism
without totalitarianism, a libertarian and often anarchic vision of a
perfect society and a condemnation of civilization for its tendency to
breed discontents."
Apart from religious tenets, however, the basic axiom of capitalism is
that lard, factories, machines, offices and other assets are owned pri-
vatey, by a small group of people who use their control to organiLe the
work process and sell goods and services in order to make profits for
themselves." Food, housing, clothing and medical care are among these
goods and services. As the development of the forces of product:on
(tools, buildings, equipment, technology and organizational techniques)
increases, the potentia! social surplus (that part of the total material
product of a society that is left over after the basic requirements needed
to maintain the people at a subsistence level of living has been met) that


[Page 94]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth77
can be produced increases. One group produces the surplus and altother
appropriates it.
The Melting Pot and the Concept of Culture
The Melting Pot, a play by the British-Jewish writer Israel Zangwill,
was first performed in 1908, and depicted America as God's Crucible,
the great melting pot. Moynihan and Glazer say that the melting pot did
not happen even in the play. Their account of the play was that the
drama was concerned with Jewish separatism and Russian anti-Semi-
tism "with a German concert master and an Irish maid thrown in."
Zangwill, himself, was engzged in one of the deterrent processes to
"melting" in that he was a separatist and a Zionist. They conclude that
the merging of the varying streams of population differentiated from one
another by origin, religion and outlook was deferred.
On the other hand, Krug argues that it was the general effectiveness of
the melting pot theory which made a balkanization of America possible.
He postulates that America owes a debt of gratitude to the inventors of
the melting pot theory, for otherwise a young nation like the United
States could not have absorbed such a large and unprecedented influx of
immigrano from so many countries, speaking so many language, wor-
shipping ir, so many different ways, and still survive as a unit(coun-
try." Krug seems to avoid the needs of capitalism in his. analysis while
Handlin makes these observations:
Becoming an American meant therefore .tot the simple conformity to a
previous pattern, but the adjustment to the needs of a new situation. In the
process the immigrants became more rather than less conscious of their own
peculiarities. As the immediate environment called for the succession of ,
institutions and novel modes of behavior, the immigrants found themselves
progressively separated as groups."
Additionally, during the great immigrations capitalism was expanding at
an astounding rate. There v,as a great need for unskilled labor to build
canals and railroads. Two hundred thousand miles of paved highways
were laid in 1910.
Another Krug assertion is that the stress on American unity and the
conscious attempt to ignore or to minimize the ethnic backgrounds of
the children of the immigrants made it possible for thousands of able
sons and daughters of the newcomers to rise rapidly to positions of
prominence in business, government, education and the professions.
Handlin has much to say on this issue:
In the end, all was tinged with vanity, with success as cruel as failure. What-
ever lot their sons had drawn in this new contentious v orld, the family's
. -eness would not survive it
0.
a'


[Page 95]
78TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Moreover, Erickson indicates that there is evidence to suggest that the
subcultural orientation is psychologically preferable to the emphasis on
the societal mainstream. Further, he says that membership in well-inte-
grated subgroups may be necessary for full participation in the larger
world."
An ethnic group is any group of the same race, religion and/or
nationality who shares a common and distinctive culture. However,
Moynihan and Glazer define ethnic groups as interest groups. They say
that the ethnic group became a new social form, not a survival from the
age of mass immigration? According to their study and in agreement
with Hand lin, ethnic groups are continually re-created by new experi-
ences even after distinctive language, custom and culture losses. They
show that these interest groups carved out work niches and experiences
for their own and passed the fruits of these labors to their children
through inheritance.
Krug's position is that the public schools were the basic workshops for
democracy for immigraat groups. He says that the members of the
various ethnic and religious groups learned to live and work together
and subsequently these schools made it possible for Jewish, Polish,
Italian and German children to attain positions of prominence in all
walks of life. Yet, he concedes that these same schools did not work as
well for blacks, the Spanish-speaking and Indians. He admits readily,
too, that the melting pot theory is irrelevant for non-white ethnics." He
does not emphasize the fact that capitalist expansion no longer needed
unskilled labor, and, thus affected the position of non-whites in the
economy. Additionally, the concept of culture may be useful in develop-
ing an explanation of the plight of these ethnic groups as well as the
concept of racism.
Wax uses Barth's=6 definition of ethnic groups as categories of ascrip-
tion and identification by the actors themselves and thus having the
characteristic of organizing interaction between people. But, Wax does
not use culture as a defining concept. He says:
."Indianness" is a socio-political rather than a cultural identity.
He says that it is misleading both to Indian and non - Irdian students to
portray Indianness as if it were a matter of preserving the traits of an
aboriginal and static culture." In adopting this stance, Wax comes close
to Moynihan and Glazer's definition of interest groups. Yet, something
is missing when culture is excluded.
If the schools reflect the society and thy. culture, then certain cultural
imperatives may operate as causes of social problems? In man's attempt
to preserve and reproduce himself, he has been in constant conflict with


[Page 96]
". ..ethnic groups are continually recreated bynew experiences ..."
the land, nature and other men. Sekou Toure defines culture in this
context:
Creative action springing from a universal imperative and culture, which is its
reflection subject and effect, both constitute universal realities. Wherever there
is the necessity of creation, we find culture. As the expression of the 'elation-
ships between man and society, between man, society andnature, culture
poses in the most pressing terms of the problem of the dialectic of the general
and the particular. Culttre is an expression, in particular, specific forms, ofa
general problemthat ofrela.ionships linking man to his environment.
These relationships.tly affected by differentiations in the struc-
ture of the objectrich regard to orientation to the polarity of
gratification and depi iv.on.3
79


[Page 97]
80 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Egos interact with social objects called alters and with non-social
objects. Social objects have expectations which are oriented toward egos
producing a complementarity of expectations. This system can be ana-
lyzed in terms of the degree of conformity of ego's action with alter's
expectations and vice versa, and the contingent reactions of alter to
ego's action are sometimes called sanctions.
The effect of these sanctions is determined by ego's need-dispositions
and the ability of alter to gratify or deprive. There, then, is a double
contingency inherent in such an interaction. Ego's gratifications are
dependent on his selection among available alternatives and alter's
reaction will be determined by ego's selection. This double contingency
produces the precondition for cultural patterns. Foreign groups emi-
grated to the United States. They brought with them their cultural
patterns, language, customs, religion and more. Their needs threatened
the cultural patterns of the Americans already here. Thinking of the
foreign groups as egos and the WASP Americans as alters, Parsons and
Shils shed light on their situation through theil discussion of the double
contingency.
If punishment or reward by alter is repeatedly manifested under certain
conditions, this reaction acquires for ego the meaning of an appropriate
consequence of ego's conformity with or deviation from the norms of a shared
symbolic system. A shared symbolic system is a system of "ways of orienting,"
plus those "external symbols" which control these ways of orienting, the
system being so geared into the action systems of both ego and alter that the
external symbols bring forth the same or a complementary pattern of orienta-
tion in both of them. Such a system, with its mutuality of normative orienta-
tion, is logically the most elementary form of culture. In this elementary social
lelationship, as well as in a large-scale social system, culture provides the
standards (value-orientations) which are applied in evaluative processes. With-
out culture neither human personalities nor human social systems would be
possible.m
Thus complementarity of expectations L. .he processes of human inter-
action is central in the analysis of the -ettiral patterns. The foreign-born
found that alter demanded conformity to he A group norm, but they
also found that individually they were powerless. The very cultural
patterns which formed their source of unity also threatened their right to
participate. This was the dilemma of these groups.
%:ativist responses did not deter B groups from their sk.drch for a way
out. The cost or assimilation was too great; therefore, most excluded
groups opted for routes to inclusion, or full participation in the social
order with preservation of their ethnic differences, one of which was the
right to be Catholic or Jewish. The obstacles to the attainment of
inclusion are the institutions which perpetuate, promote and preserve


[Page 98]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth81
the symbolic universes of the dominant group. In thissocial order,
where so many groups with varying culturalpatterns reside, pluralism
and desires for inclusion confound the double contingency andthe
complementarity of expectations. Pluralism is here definedas the condi-
tion of cultural parity among ethnic groups ina common society.
The melting pot theory was to be operationalized in theschools
through education, one of the two great equalizers in the society.How-
ever. schools financed through the property tax are unequal andrepro-
duce. the hierarchical social division of labor. Children of affluence
receive more years of schooling than children of poverty. Both the
amount and the content of their education greatly facilitate theirmove-
ment into positions similar to their parents." The other great equalizer,
the progressive income tax, was to place the burden ofgovernment on
taxpayers according to their ability to pay. Yet, millionairespay no
income taxes. FHA finances middle-class homes. Lockheedgoes on
welfare. Oil millionaires profit from government subsidy,as do farmers,
some of whom are U.S. Senators.
The Power-Inclusion Model
The great myth that the public schoolswere effective mobility vehicles
for white American immigrant groups has beena notorious diehard.
Greeley shows a difference of more than twentypercentage points
between the children of northern Italian immigrants and those ofsouth-
ern Italians." Handlin describes the schools for immigrants in graphic
terms:
Mostly the teachers kept their distance, kept flickering the hope thata transfer
might take them to a nicer district with nicer pupils from nicer homes.When
that hope died, bitterness was born; and there was thereaftermore savagery
than love in their instruction."
Obviously, one individual could not buck sucha system without sup-
port. Most B groups have used a separatist model to provide it. This
separatist men' 1. for group mobility and full citizenship in the American
social order i,...; been called a Power-Inclusion Model. It hastwo strate-
gies, violence and nonviolence, and five stages. See Figure I,p. 82."
The first stage is the separatist stage, during which the excludedgroup
defines its identity. This is consistent with Barth's definition of ethnicity.
This process includes the emergence of the pseudospecies declaration,
"We are the chosen people made in the image of God." The unchdsen
are given special names, such as goyim, devils and pagans. It is during
this stage that social or group identities are carefully delineated and
religion is used to emphasize the "we" or "in"group feeling from which


[Page 99]
MI6
82TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
FIGURE 1
POWER-INCLUSION MODEL FOR EXCLUDED GROUPS
1 National Power
of Group
Power of
Other Groups
Stage 5
Power
CoalitionsI
Political PowerVoting Blocs.
Stage 4Communityon Economic Base
Control1 Pluralism
A
Business PowerDevelopment of
Union PowerEconomic BaseStage 3
Personal Wealthon Group identityCapitalism
and Cohesion
A
Myths, Rites,
Identity
Group Cohesion
Rejection of Others
(Negative Identity)
.1Mr
Stage 2
Nationalism
Rituals
Institutions andta
Organizations
Ideas, Activism
Religion
Ethnicity
Language
Culture
Race
as.
Cohesion
Pseudospecies Declaration
Identity Specification
Territ.rial Imperative
Stage 1
Separatism
cohesion results. The identity-separation phenomenon is difficult to
analyze, for it is an ongoing process. The stages of identity formation
probably occur before the inclusion process but provide the necessary
impetus for movement into it. The process cannot begin until identity is
defined. But once this definition occurs, cohesion can develop. This
cohesion is further enhanced by the attachment of a group to a land
base. The separatist stage is characterized by three developments: (1) the
pseudospecies declaration, (2) the identity specification, and (3) the
territorial imperative. Separatism is the condition of separation which
occurs when one group decides voluntarily to separate from other
groups.
The second stage is the nationalist stage, in which the excluded group
intensifies its cohesion by building a religio-cultural community of be-
liefs around its creation, history, and development. The history, religion
Barbara A. Sizemore, "Is There a Case for Separate Sch,:ols?",Phi Delta Kappa,,,
January,1972, p. 282.


[Page 100]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth83
and philosophy of the nation from which thegroup comes dictate the
rites, rituals and ceremonies utilized in the proselytization of theold
nationalism. Because of rejection by white Anglo-Saxon Protestantsand
the ensuing exclusion from full participation in the social order,the
excluded group embraces its former or future nation. For the Irish
Catholics, it was Ireland; for the Polish Catholics, Poland; andfor the
Jews it was Zion-Israel. This intense nationalistic involvement increases
separatism.
Through this model, ethnic groups plug their form of nationalism into
Americanism (the common core of myths and language provided bythe
White Anglo -Saxon ideal) and become Irish-Americans, Italian-Ameri-
cans, German-Americans. The nationalism of these groups is paraded
annually on holidays such as March 17, St. Patrick's Day. So intense
was the involvement of the nationalistic stage that such vestiges still
remain. As group cohesion and solidarity increased, development ofthe
negative identity occurred. The negative identity of other pseudospecies
is "perversely based on all those identifications of finding and defending
,a niche of one's own."36
The third stage of progression toward inclusion is the capitalistic
stage. The cohesion developed in the separatist stage and magnified in
the nationalist stage, added to the rejection of others created inthe
second phase, produces a need which can be the foundation foran
economic base for the group. The negative identity is the mechanism for
relegating other groups to the loser category and nationalism and reli-
gion provide the dynamics necessary for the maintenance ofgroup
cohesion and solidarity for the creation of thenecessary work niche and
economic bloc.
Such work niches and blocs are discussed by Moynihan and Glazer
who demonstrate that the best jobs demand skills and trainingwhich
tend to be kept within the "in" group." Therefore the problemis not
simply discrimination against the blacks orany one group, but against
all outsiders. In other words, there are Irish and Italian skilledworkers
in part because Irish and Italians were prominent in contractingand
construction and they dominated the unions. Nationalism andseparat-
ism have contributed to an ethnic base for business and jobs.
According to Weisskopf,m capitalism has historically been character-
ized by great inequalities in the distribution of income and wealth.He
says that the only legitimate claim to income arises from the possession
of one's'own labor-power and from the ownership of the physicalmeans
of production. In advanced capitalist nations, labor incometypically
accounts for about three-quarters and property (capital) income for
about one-quarter of the total national income. The distributionof
capital ownership in a capitalist society is necessarily unequal, "for if


[Page 101]
84 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
every individual shared equally in the ownership of capital, the funda-
mental distinction between the capitalist and the worker would vanish."
The idea is to accumulate enough capital to become an owner of prop-
erty and the means of production. The route up is through the control of
jobs (wages and salaries).
This control over jobs (unions), as stated before, depended on certain
skills -passed through family background socialization and on-the-job
training. Access to these was through the ethnic group. Maintenance of
accumulated capital was passed on to the next generation through
inheritance, consequently, endogamous practices were imperative.
The fourth stage is the pluralistic stage, during which the group
utilizes its cohesion-rejection powers to form a political bloc on its
economic base in order to thrust its interests into the foreground of the
political arena. Here the "interest group" concept of Moynihan, Glazer,
and Wax combine with the culture concept of Toure, Cruse, Carmichael
and Hamilton, and Krug. It is in this stage which gives the illusion of
parity, one man, one vote. But political power is dependent upon finan-
cial backing. Without an economic base, a group- is dependent on
another for this need.
An example is the UFT fight against community control in the fa-
mous Ocean Hill-Brownsville case. Rogers reports that the majority of
teachers, principals, and district superintendents as well as headquarters
officials in the New York City school system are Jewish.
"There may be as many as 35,000 Jewish public educators inAhe New
York City school system, and they set the tone as much as the Irish do
in Boston?"9
Consequently, the largely Jewish UFT combined its economic clout
with its political bloc and forced the city of New York to dismantle its
plans for real community control. Th decentralization pattern which
resulted is being duplicated throughout the country as providing real
community decision-making.
In fact, in the black man's drive for integration which started in
housing, the white response was separation. Since identity cohesion is an
important Variable in four stages of the power-inclusion model, the
particular ethnic group involved in integration responds to this need.
When an ethnic group is approaching or is in the nationalistic phase
where identity cohesion is great, the rejection of others will be intense.
Resistance to desegregation may be fierce and violent. When the ethnic
group is approaching or in the capitalistic phase, where identity coin-
sion and rejection have formed a strong economic base, resistance may
be immediate but nonviolent. In integration of housing, for example,
this group could afford to relocate or to prevent the invasion.


[Page 102]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth85
When a group enters the pluralistic stage, integration may be a threat
to its cultural institutions, but the group's high degree of participation in
decision-making offers abundant opportunities for control of therate of
integration. Resistance might be delayed and nonviolent. Once in the
Power phase, the group is then ready to control the conditions which
provide impetus foi integration. Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamil-
ton"' indicate that coalitions are not viable when blacksare not equal
partners.-In this capitalistic society, no partner without capital is equal.
The fifth stage is the power stage, sometimes called egalitarian and/or
democratic. In this stage the economic and voting blocs and coalitions
guarantee that the interests of the group have as much chance of win-
ning as those of other groups at this level of participation. This is still
utopian. Power is still held by white Anglo-Saxon Protestants but both
Jews and Catholics are trying to get it:"
Implications for Education
The idea of the melting pot is as old as the republic,say Moynihan
and Glazer, but through time the number and kinds of immigrants
involved changed, and the confidence that they could be fused together
waned. Their evidence is the history of immigration exclusion andquota
laws which created successive and selective barriers to certaingroups of
people.'" The barrier of racism operates effectively for blacks, the Span-
ish-speaking and the Indians. Racism is the inherent belief in the superi-
ority of one's own race, and, as Dickeman points out, "pq ispart of a
larger philosophy, an ethnocentric dedication to the remodellingof
citizens to conform to a single homogeneous acceptable model." The
educational' system was created to maintain the A/B relationship,to
promote the Protestant Ethic and white Anglo-Saxon ethnocentrismas
the symbolic universe with which all groups must conform, andto
socialize A groups as distributors of the capitalistic surplus and Bgroups
as the consumers."
To change the schools so that they become institutions for education
instead of indoctrination, several cultural, racial and religious ethics
must be taught. Democracy must be practiced and capitalism must be
understood. Superficial, band-aid approaches suchas sensitivity train-
ing, curriculum revision and teacher recruitment willnot suffice.
Roles must be re-defined and dialogical processes must begin. The
new teacher will be a subject-actor, the administrator a facilitator, the
student an actor-subject. The teaching-learningprocess must be seen in
a new light and given more meaningful interpretations tailored to the


[Page 103]
_z
;
"The teaching-learning process must be seen in a new light and given more meaning-
ful interpretations tailored to the needs of the specific client and his unique prob-
lems."


[Page 104]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth87
needs of the specific client and his unique problems. The essence of this
new methodology is dialogue according to Paulo Freire who says:
Authentic education is not carried on by "A" for "B" or by "A" about "B",
but rather by "A" with "B", mediated by the worlda-world which impresses
and challenges both parties, giving rise to views or opinions about it.4s
Teachers and students are both subjects in this method, and they negoti-
ate over the mediating objects. Ideas such as poverty can be mediating
objects as can racism or ethnocentrism.
Hierarchical decision-making models will no longer serve since they
impede dialogue. An aggregate model is required to facilitate dialogue
and to increase the chances for mutuality of effort among the various
constituencies: community, administrators, parents, teachers and
dents (CAPTS). Without such a model "B" groups fall constant prey to
"divide and conquer tactics."46 Such a model is the Community Control
Decision-Making Model. See Figure 2.
FIGURE 2*
COMMUNITY CONTROL DECISION-MAKING MODEL
A Al v
Approval6Community BoardReceiving5 OP Veto
I iRecommending 7CAPTS Congress'Accepting4 OP Rejecting OP
V ACoordinating8Administrative StaffOrganizing3
Communicating .
V
ProfessionalImplementingBureaucracyV
9 Formulating2
Evaluating10CAPTS CongressPlanning1+111Start Here
`Community, Administration, Parents, Teachers, and Students
The model has ten steps. First each group meets separately. A plan
emerges. It is submitted to the other groups who discuss and negotiate.
The negotiated plan is then sent to the professional bureaucracy to be
formulated into an educational program. This formulation is then sent
to the administrative staff for organization. The administrative staff then
submits the proposal to the CAPTS Congress. There is a body of repre-
sentatives from each of the constituencies. The CAPTS Congress either
accepts or vetoes the proposal. If it accepts, it forwards it to the commu-
nity board which receives or vetoes. If the Congress rejects the proposal,
it starts over again in planning. If the community board vetoes the
* Barbara A. Sizemore, "Is There a Case for Separate Schools?", Phi Delta Kappan,
January, 1972, p. 283.


[Page 105]
88TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
proposal, it starts again also. If the community receives the acceptance
of the Congress, the proposal is ready for implementation and is sent to
the Congress for recommendations, then to the administrative staff for
coordination and communication. The proposal is forwarded to the
professional bureaucracy for implementation and to the CAPTS Con-
gress for evaluation. Each group meets separately again to discuss the
method and the instruments to be used for evaluation. These are then
negotiated and the evaluation takes place according to this negotiated
plan!'
Such a decision-making process allows all groups to participate and
becomes a tool for cultural pluralism and opportunity equalization. The
evaluation procedure will sharpen diagnostic skills for all and will re-
lease new sets of knowledge about each constituency. Learning to ini-
tiate and execute dialogue will require skills in interviewing, microeth-
nography, questionnaire construction, public opinion polling, test con-
struction, categorizing and codifying. Careful study of selected charac-
teristics of each constituency will lead to better program designs specifi-
cally geared to deal with a well-defined problem.
It is difficult for A groups to define B group problems. This failure at
the definitional level results in solutions which are inadequatethe right
solutions but to the wrong problems. The professional education of
teachers seen as perennial students must-begin with knowledge, infor-
mation and skills which create a dialogue with people in order to define
problems.
In designing a curriculum to deal with the economic, cultural and
political aspects of the total social reality, the education of CAPTS must
change in order (1) to create more accurate conceptual maps of reality;
(2) to understand those who might want to interfere with the program of
reform; (3) to establish a dialogue with the clients, the students; and (4)
to provide better insights into the causes of things so that more alterna-
tives will become available for the solution of problems. A liberal arts
program with strong interdisciplinary courses including economics, an-
thropology and political science can bring much needed sets of knowl-
edge to the teacher and administrator who can share with other mem-
bers of CAPTS, yet strengthening the content of teachers' courses will
not be enough.
Berger and Luckmann say that knowledge is socially distributed,
possessed differently by different individuals, and can become highly
complex. They argue that all symbolic universes and all legitimations are
human products whose existence has its base in the lives of concrete
individuals and has no empirical status apart from these lives. Conse-
quently, social change must always be understood as standing in a
dialectical relationship to the "history of ideas. ""


[Page 106]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth89
In the American social order, it seems that knowledge is distributed
by A groups to B groups. This strengthens the position of A over B.
Knowledge can also be withheld. Berger and Luckmann posit that those
in power are ready to use that power to impose the traditional defini-
tions of reality on the population under their authority. They say "power
in society includes the power to determine decisive socialization pro-
cesses, and, therefore, the power to produce reality." The demands for
changes in the educational institutions are for changes in this power
arrangement. The hue and cry for community control is directed toward
a correction of this A/B formula. These demands for power are derived
from an ideology taken on by various groups because of specific theoret-
ical elements that are-conducive to its interests, as Moynihan and Glazer
indicate. Every group in social conflict must achieve solidarity and
ideologies generate that solidarity. The resistance to white supremacy
and European superiority by blacks and to property owners by the poor
is endemic to the struggle for community control since the schools
financed by the property tax remain in the hands of the property owners
who wish to obtain the best education possible for their own children
with the lowest tax attainable for the maintenance of the status quo.
Curriculum changes emerge from evaluation data and the decision-
making apparatus. These changes in content and substance, teaching
and its methodology, the administration and its organization, all accom-
modate the inputs of the various ethnic, interest and excluded groups to


[Page 107]
90 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
make the school a vehicle for cultural pluralism and to provide the
conceptual maps necessary for understanding the total social reality.
This understanding can lead to alternatives for full participation in the
social order with the maintenance of ethnic differences. More important,
these changes give B groups more control over ways of orienting to
external symbols creating new behaviors geared into the action systems
of both A 'and B groups.
In 1965, an attempt was made to effect such curriculum changes at the
Forrestville High School in District 23, Chicago, Illinois. During this
time a part of the black community was agitating for educational parks
to enhance the possibilities for integration. Three experimental districts
were implemented by the Chicago Board of Education and District 23
was one. A new high school was to be built to alleviate the overcrowding
but controversy developed over the selection of a site. Part of the
community wanted the high school located in the district. This would
mean that, it would be a segregated high school. These parents-felt that
there was nothing wrong with being black; that the community had few
resources, the high school being one; and they did not want to lose it.
Others felt that white financial support would be forthcoming only for
white students and, if blacks expected their children to receive equal
education, those children would have to be in schools where whites
were.
An aggregate body of community representatives, administrators,
parents, teachers and students (CAPTS) were concerned over the con-
stellation of problems which plagued the school such as gang-related
activities, low achievement, high dropout rates, poor facilities and the
lack of eqUipment and materials. They felt that the controversy over
integration skirted the edutational issues; therefore, during three Satur-
days in October, 1965, twenty teams of two visited over three hundred
homes soliciting the views of parents regarding the location of the new
high school. Seventy-eight percent of the parents wanted the new high
school in the district and twenty-two percent wanted, it located outside
of the community. These data were delivered to the General Superinten-
dent who then selected a site in the district. The new Martin Luther
King High School was later constructed on this site.
Once this problem was resolved, CAPTS began to look at the prob-
lems of the community. Recorded observations reflected the following:
(1) More students wanted instrumental music than the facility could accommo-
date
(2) There were over thirty informal singing groups formed among the high
school students
(3) Incoming freshmen had a median reading score of 4.8
(4) Sophomore boys had the highest dropout rate


[Page 108]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth91
(5) Two girls graduated for every one boy
(6) Approximately eighty percent of the attendance and discipline problems
were attributed to freshmen
(7) Four out of every five students in the freshmen,Civics classes cut because
they felt the subject matter was boring and irrelevant
(8) Seventy-seven percent of the students in study halls cut study
(9) The high school district had been declared an urban renewal area and
demolition was a daily occurrence
(10) The majority of the homes in the district were owned by absentee landlords
(11) Liquor stores were the predominant business on the 43rd Street strip
(12) Over sixty percent of high school males between theages of 12 and 18 had
had some encounter with the police
A meeting of CAPTS was called to discuss these data and what they
imported for the planning of the new high school. At this meetinga
committee was-assigned to this planning.
The parents on the new school committee began to discuss the possi-
bility of having larger music, art and drama departments in thenew
school. Teachers were resistant at first to the idea but gradually thenew
high school emerged. The performing arts was to be thecore. Parents
did not want it to be a singinf and dancing high school. It had to be
more. It had to respond to the students and their needi.
Five parents; three teachers and three students met with the architects
to discuss these ideas. The stage was to be the center of the school
surrounded by a television beaming station and an electronic shop
where the students could learn hoW to design and repair television
equipment. There were to be a radio station and a recording studio for
students interested in related careers. The business departmentwas to be
located nearby so that students who wanted to be entertainers could
learn the whole business because parents and teachers wanted to end ihe
exploitation of black entertainers by agents and businessmen. Students
majoring in the performing arts were to learn accounting, business law,
income tax preparation and management necessary to control their
talents.
There were to be a ballet room and a little theatre that was to offer
opportunities for unique techniques in the use of sociodrama for teach-
ing reading to those who despaired of ever learning how with books.
Here the students were to use videotapes and cassettes to learn to read.
Near the little theatre the sewing rooms were situated so thatcostumes
for plays could be made. So located were the art rooms and the wood
shops for .flaking scenery for the theatre.
For students who wanted to be professionals, performing arts was to
be the motivating dynamic. Independent study situationswere built into
the acajemic departments of mathematics, social studies, science, biol-
ogy and language. A large library was located in the front of the school


[Page 109]
r
f
92TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
with private carrels and listening posts to accommodate independent
learning. Every effort was made to maximize the use of the multi-media.
The Related Ideas Unit
1 nrough the interaction of parents, teachers and students several new
entries appeared in the curriculum. Black History and Black Literature
were introduced in many classes as were African art and music. Courses
were designed to provide orientation and group guidance for more
relevant and meaningful services to the students. One of these was the
"Related Ideas Unit" which was an introduction to the ba:.ic structures
of the high school subject areas. The general objectives were:
1. To establish a functional or organic approach to the total school program.
,
2. To build a social environment based on language, thought and activity.
3. To establish throughout the school environment the theory of functional or
organic processes.
The specific objectives of the unit were:
1. To establish Forrestville as a community within a community.
2. To regard the division room activity as an important social unit of the
Forrestville community image.
3. To develop in the classrooms the kind of socialization process that will enable..
the teacher to more fully realize his educational aims, and at the same time
create a closer identification 'of the student with his high school and commu-
nity.
The teaching-learning objectives were:
1. To help each student to develop realistic ideas about himself (social reality).
2. To help the student to see that what he does determines what he is.
3. To establish the Forrestville way as a process of doing something with the
student, not to him, or for him.
4. To regard the student as his own ultimate subject of study.
5. To help the student to find meaning in
a) what he is
b) what he says
c) what he does
d) what happens to him
e) what he may become
6. To make the student an active participant in learning about himself, others
and his universe.
7. To draw out of the student his most cherished beliefs about himself and his
social environment.
The unit was designed to help the student to think critically about
himself, his society, his natural order and his values. It was not the aim
/el.II ".
11
I'
i


[Page 110]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth93
to give the student a set of answers to these problem areas, but rather to
increase his critical awareness. The student was to be confronted in
every classroom, with the Related Ideas Unit the first three we"'
school during the 1966-67 school year to develop a foundati
outside thought and discussion. As an outgrowth of the unit, m.sic
freshman civics classes outlined programs for community study. Honors
classes set up projects for the study of land distribution in the city of
Chicago..
The unit utilized a basic ideas approach which consisted of a vocabu-
lary and a schema for looking at the world. See Charts I, H and III.
Chart I
Man's Way of Looking at the Whole World
SUBSTANCE
MATERIAL SUBSTANCE
All things we:
We know that these
things exist because
our senses
tell us this.
Sense
see
hear
touch
taste
smell
Organ
(eyes)
(ears)
(skin)
(mouth)
(nose)
OrganicInorganic
(Living)(Non-Living)
rocks
iron
I
AnimalsPlants
1
VertebratesInvertebrates
Man
Fish
Frogs
Snakes
Birds
Mammals
Human Beings
1
Woman
NON-MATERIAL SUBSTANCE
Our senses alone cannot tell
us about things on this side.
We cannot see, hear, touch,
taste or smell things on this
side, but we know or think we
know that they exist.
truth
happiness
freedom
justice
love
dignity


[Page 111]
Chart II
Is man shaped by his social world or does man shape his social world?
VOCABULARY
Person
Family
Neighborhood
Community
City
State
Nation
World
Universe
i.


[Page 112]
04,--^
Is man shaped by ideas or does man shape ideas?
VOCABULARY
Man
Religion
Art
Music
Language
Mathematics
Philosophy
Science0


[Page 113]
96TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Chart III
Man's Way of Measuring Himself
I. SCIENCES(Methods of discovering and exploring phenomena)
A. Physical scienceBasic unit of explanation
1. Chemistry(matter)
2. Physics(energy)
3. Biology(life)
B. Social Science
I. History(time)
2. Sociology(group)
3. Anthropology(man)
4. Religion(god)
5. Economics(wealth)
6. Psychology(behavior)
7. Mythology(story)
8. Geography(place)
9. Civics(duty)
II. ARTS (Methods of expressing thoughts and feelings)
A. Performing Arts
1. Music(note)
2. Art(form)
3. Drama(play)
4. Dance(step)
5. Athletics(game)
B. Communication Arts
I. Language(word)
2. Mathematics(number)
..
The Basic Unit does not include every aspect of the academic disciplinenor does it
pretend to encompass the entire content of the subjector to exclude overlapping content
areas.


[Page 114]
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth97
The Related Ideas Unit had six stages developed by a teacher-student
committee for teacher implementation:
STAGE ONE
1. Before classes arrive:
a. Inspect your classroom!
b. Secure all essential items and equipment necessary for the completion of
your job.
c. Rearrange the classroom if you desire to do so.
d. Seating arrangements should fit some definite order.
e. Place your name in the upper right-hand corner of the chalk board.
f. Draw the form for assignment sheets on the chalk board.
STAGE Two
1. Take attendancehave students make assignment sheets for your class.
2. Check program cards.
3. Allow students time to prepare interview reports.
4. Make seating charts.
5. Make sure that everyone has given a report and has had a report given about
him.
STAGE THREE
Begin discussion on the nature of your particular subject. Allow the students to
do most of the talking. Ask them how (course name) is related to what they have
talked about in their divisions.
STAGE FOUR
(Spend as much time as needed to accomplish Stage Four.)
1. Elect or select class officers and/or clerical workers in a style most fitting to
you and the nature of your class.
2. Pass out seating assignments. You select whatever means for assigning seats
to the students.
3'. (First period class teacher) pass out charts 1, 2, 3, have students look up
definitions of these terms.
STAGE FIVE
All Academic ClassesMan's Way of Looking at Himself and Other Things
Objective: To foster a continuous discussion on this question in all classes.
Possible approachesthe classroom teacher might ask how the question. was
handled (if at all) in the previous class or classes.
Questions: How are these charts related to my life?
How are these charts related to my particular
subjects at Forrestville High School?


[Page 115]
98TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
STAGE SIX
Teacher presents his own subject matter.
1. By pointing out the relationship of
to the Related Ideas Unit.
This Related Ideas Unit is responsive to any ethnic and/or interest
group. It permits dialogue and the negotiations of mediating objects.
Culture as the specific form and expression of the relationships linking
man to his envir tnment permeates the entire program and is dictated by
the participants themselves. No one pattern of culture can dominate
when the mechanism for decision-making includes all participants. The
values which dominate the construction of curriculum will respondto
the needs of the students, their parents and that community instead of to
the institution.
But, these efforts made during 1966-1967 at Forrestville High School
were not sustained when the Martin Luther King High School was
occupied. The curriculum reverted to the traditional experience and its
symbolic universe. So that in 1973 there is only a trace of the performing
arts thrust and no sign of collective decision-making.
Jules Henry stated that "American education is bleak;so bleak in-
deed that, on the whole, educators having long agt., abandoned the ideal
of enlightenment, concentrate on tooling up." For Henry, several factors
constrict education: the political economy and its need for rampant
consumption of the gross national product, wars, and the occupational
systems which demand stupidity and vulnerability. The educational
system`must then aim at a steady state. He explains thisstate:
All steady-state systems of culture are designed to developa kind of equilib-
rium between, on the one hand, a spontaneity adequate to preventa person's
going to pieces when confronted with any novelty at all, and,on the other, a
spontaneity so unfettered that he will propose new solutions ..."
Hopefully, the shattering of the melting pot _myth will unchain the
schools so that the potential of cultural pluralism will be unleashed.
Men structure their social relations in a groupor larger collectivity of
people and share beliefs and orientations that unite members of the
collectivity and guide their conduct. The large collectivity of people in
this country called Americans share certain beliefs of white European
superiority, male superiority and the superiority of people withmoney.
These beliefs create excluded groups: non-whites,women and the poor."
The professional education of teachers must be humanized bycon-
cern for the inclusion of these groups in the larger collectivity of people
called Americans through aggregate models and cultural pluralism.
Teachers must learn to be human. Studentsare demanding more from
personal relations. They want to be people.
(


[Page 116]
"Hopefully. the shattering of the melting pot myth will unchain the schools so that
the potential of cultural pluralism will be unleashed."
There is no doubt that a democratic culturally pluralistic society is
imperative. That fights must be waged on all fronts is accepted. Educa-
tion can then be concerned with the meeting of men's needs of identity,
stimulation and security based on their values of land, liberty and life.
Once this occurs, the vital area of man's purpose and existence on this
earth becomes the primary focus of his educational experience and the
point position at the frontier of knowledge.
99


[Page 117]
6
100TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
FOOTNOTES
' Cruse, Harold. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual (N.Y.: William Morrow & Co.,
1967), p. 7.
Ibid., p. 456.
' Higham, John. Strangers in the Land (N.Y.: Atheneum, 1971), p. 4. Quoted by Carlos
Brossard in "Variants in Nativism: 1820-1900" (Unpublished manuscript, Harvard Ubi-
versity, 1972), p. I.
' Brossard, op. cit., p. 3.
' Ibid., p. 5.
Berger, Peter L. and Thomas Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., Inc., 1966), pp. 85-118.
' Weber, Max. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (N.Y.: Charles Scrib-
ner's Sons, 1958).
Handlin, Oscar. The Uprooted (N.Y.: Atlantic-Little, Brown, 1951), pp. 244-258.
' Deutch, Morton. "Cooperation and Trust: Some Theoretical Notes" in Interpersonal
Dynamics, Warren G. Bennis, Edgar H. Steele (Eds.), (Homewood, III.: Dorsey, 1964), p.
506.
"Tax, Sol. "The Freedom to Make Mistakes" in Fred Gearing, Robert McNetting, and
Lisa R. Peathe (Eds.), The Documentary History of the Fox Project (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1960), pp. 245-250.
" Weber, op. cit., pp. 35-46 and 47-78.
" Ibid., p. 116.
"Novak, Michael. The Rise of the Unmeltabk Ethnics (N.Y.: The Macmillan Co.,
1971), pp. 9-14 and 170-177.
"Berkowitz, Rabbi William. Ten Vital Jewish Issues (N.Y.: Thomas Yoseloff, 1964), p.
21.
" Ibid., pp. 104-105.
"Novak, op. cit., p. 175.
" Edwards, Richard C., Michael Reich and Thomas E. Weisskopf (Eds.). The Capitalist
System (Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1972), pp. 90-91.
" Moynihan, Daniel P. and Nathan Glazer. Beyond the Melting Pot (Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1963), p. 289.
"Krug, Mark. "Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups" in James A. Banks
(Ed.), Teaching Ethnic Studies: Concepts and Strategies (Washington, D.C.: National
Council for the Social Studies 1973 Yearbook).
" Handlin, op. cit., p. 186.
21 Ibid., p. 66. See Mildred Dickeman, "Teaching Cultural Pluralism" in James A. Banks
(Ed.), Teaching Ethnic Studies: Concepts and Strategies (Washington, D.C.: National
Council for the Social Studies 1973 Yearbook).
" Handlin, op. cit., p. 258.
"Erickson, Donald A. "Freedom's Two Educational Imperatives: A Proposal" in Public
Controls for Nonpublic Schools, edited by Donald A. Erickson (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1969), p. 161. See also "Contradictory Studies of Parochial Schooling: An
Essay Review," School Review, 76 (Winter, 1967), pp. 425-436.
"Moynihan and Glazer, op. cit., p. 17.
" Krug, op. cit., See Mildred Dickeman, op. cit.,
"Wax, Murray L. "Cultural Pluralism, Political Power, and Ethnic Studies" (Unpub-
lished manuscript). Quoted by Wax from Frederick Barth. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries
(Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1969), pp. 9-38.
Ibid., p. 3.
"Sizemore, Barbara A. "Making the Schools a Vehicle for Cultural Pluralism" (Unpub-
lished manuscript prepared for TTT Conference, Chicago, Illinois, 1971).
" Tour6, Sekou. "A Dialectical Approach to Culture,' The Black Scholar, November,
1969, p. 13.


[Page 118]
I
;
s
Shattering the Melting Pot Myth101
".Parsons, Talcott, Edward A. Shils and others. "Some Fundamental Categories ofthe
Theory of Action: A General Statement" in Toward a General Theory of Action, edited
by Talcott Parsons and Edward A. Shils (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1951),pp.
3-29.
" Parsons and Shils, op. cit., p. 16.
"2 Bowles, Samuel. "Unequal Education and the Reproduction of the Hierarchical Divi-
sion of Labor" in Edwards, Reich and Weisskopf, op. cit., pp. 218-229.
" Greeley, Andrew M. Why Can't They Be Like Us?(N.Y.: E. P. Dutton & Co., 1971),
p. 29. See also The Education of Catholic Americans by Andrew M. Greeley and Peter H.
Rossi (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1966).
" Handlin, op. cit., p. 248.
"Sizemore, Barbara A. "Separatism: A Reality Approach to Inclusion?" in Racial Crisis
in American Education, edited by Robert L. Green (Chicago: Follett Educational Corpo-
ration, 1969), pp. 249-279.
"Erikson, Erik H. Identity: Youth and Crisis (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 1968),p. 175.
" Moynihan and Glazer, op. cit., p. 31.
" 1 Weisskopf, Thomas E. "Capitalism and Inequality" in Edwards, Reich and Weisskopf,
op. cit., pp. 125-133.
" Rogers, David. 110 Livingston Street: Politics and Bureaucracy in the New York City
School System (New York: Random House, 1968), p. 161.
"Carmichael, Stokely and Charles V. Hamilton. Black Power (N.Y.: Random House,
1967), p. 96.
" Sizemore, Barbara A. "Is There a Case for Separate Schools?" Phi Delta Kappan,
January, 1972, pp. 281-284.
"Moynihan and Glazer, op. cit., pp. 288-289.
" Dickeman, Mildred. "Teaching Cultural Pluralism" in James A. Banks (Ed.), Teach-
ing Ethnic Studies: Concepts and Strategies (Washington, D.C.: National Council for the
Social Studies 1973 Yearbook).
"For an interesting discussion of this point see Jules Henry, Culture Against Man
(N.Y.: Random House, 1963); and "Is Education Possible? Are We Qualified to Enlighten
Dissenters?" in Public Controls for Nonpublic Schools by Donald A. Erickson (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1969), pp. 83-102.
" Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppresied (N.Y.: Herder and Herder, 1970),p. 82.
* Ibid., pp. 137-143.
"Sizemore, Barbara A. "Is There a Case for Separate Schools?", op. cit.,p. 282.
" Berger and Luckmann, op. cit., pp. 107-118.
"The Related Ideas Unit and the Division Guidance Program were directed by Ander-
son Thompson, Assistant Professor, Center for Inner City Studies, Northeastern Illinois
State University. Mr. Thompson was Assistant Principal of Forrestville High School.
"Henry, Jules. "Is Education Possible? Are We Qualified to Enlighten Dissenters?",op.
cit., p. 100.
"For more information on this point see Barbara A. Sizemore, "Social Science and
Education for a Black Identity" in Black Self-Concept, edited by James A. Banks and
Jean D. Grambs (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1972), pp. 141-170.


[Page 119]
Larry Cuban
LARRY CUBAN is a teacher at .Roosevelt High School (Washington,
1). C Public Schools), and is currently working on his Ph.D. at Stanford.
Mr. Cuban is the former Director of Staff Development for the District
of Columbia Public Schools and Director of the Cardozo Project in
Urban Teaching. He has also served as Director of Race and Education
for the United States Commission on Civil Rights.
Mr. Cuban has been an urban consultant to numerous public and
private agencies, including the National Teacher Corps, the United
States Office of Education, and the University of Washington. He served
on the President's Advisory Committee for the Teacher Corps, and was
a member of the United States Office of Education Summer Institute on
Educational Renewal in 1972, a group which prepared a document on
reform in the nation's public schools.
His articles have appeared in such publications as the Phi Delta
Kappan, Social Education. The Los Angeles Times, Harvard Educa-
tional Review, Saturday Review, and the Journal of Negro Education.
He is the author of To Make a Difference: Teaching in the Inner City,
Black Man in America, Youth as a Minority (NCSS), and 'The' Promise
of America. He is the coauthor and program editor of the Scott Pores-
man Spectra Program, which includes volumes entitled Japan, India,
Mexico, Kenya, and Russia,
102


[Page 120]
LARRY CUBAN
5
Ethnic Content
and "White" Instruction
In those classrooms where earnest teachers are telling it like it is,pas-
sionate advocates of ethnic edutation will soon discover studentsyawn-
ing. Some programs have already reported lower enrollments, erratic
attendance, and youngsters "resting their eyes." As ethnic studies multi-
ply, boredom will drive students up the walls in frustration; worse yet,
apathetic students will encourage teachers and administrators to draw
inaccurate conclusions about ethnic education.
At issue here, I think, are some of the directions taken by ethnic
studies and their possible consequences for educating children. The
questions I raise here, and I want to be clear on this point,are directed
less at their academic validity than at the sloppy educational thinking
that has produced quickie programs in both black and white public
schools.
With racism in curriculum and instructional materials having been
revealed for all to see in the last few years, the main thrust behind ethnic
education has been to catch up on knowledge and "truth." Demands by
students and teachers to tell it like it is has triggered thunderbolts of
facts hitherto ignored or suppressed. This catch-up syndrome masksa
basic error in educational thinking: the belief that racismcan be elimi-
nated by filling up kids with information. By casting the issue into
familiar and manageable terms, educators of both races leap at the
obvious, ignoring a far more critical problem"white instruction."
Reprinted from Phi Delta Kappan, January, 1972, Vol. 53,pp. 270-273, with the
permission of Phi Delta Kappa and Larry Cuban.
103


[Page 121]
104TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"White instruction" is a shorthand term to describe those traditional
methods of telling, explaining, and clarifying that have been the main-
stay of classrooms for the last millennium. I mean the teacher's view of
the learner as a passive absorber of data. I mean the belief that acquisi-
tion of all the facts must precede analysis. I mean the credo that the
function of the public schools is to instill certain values and attitudes.
These articles of faith have been too long a design for failure.
To graft ethnic content onto white instruction will shrivel and ulti-
mately kill a hardy, vital effort to reform what happens in the classroom.
And that is what I feel is happening now. A-brief look at some examples
of the grafting process may be instructive.
Because of enormous gaps in ethnic knowledge, there is a logical and
determined effort by teachers to communicate information to fill those
gaps. Teachers of black history, for example, -lecture students about
heart surgeon Daniel Hale Williams, poet Jupiter Hammon, artist Henry
Tanner, and blues singer Bessie Smith. Better informed teachers add an
indictment of white political and cultural oppression. To assist teachers
in communicating this data, there are bigger and blacker textbooks,
myriad filmstrips, records, and workbooks.
Without reviewing the exhaustive criticism of traditional methods of
instruction, without invoking Jerome Bruner's, John Holt's, or any other
critic's words on how the educational ball game has changed (or should
change) from the days when books were chained to tables and teachers
had to lecturewithout all of that, let me focus on just one crucial
point: Traditional approaches to ethnic content lock students into the
passive role of soaking up information.
This role, with all of its assumptions about the authority of the teacher
as truth-giver, offers only a small margin of interaction. And that thin
margin of interaction, hanging upon the teacher's willingness to enter
into give-and-take discussion, shrinks even further because of another
traditional article of faith: the dedicated belief in the proposition that
students cannot analyze issuesespecially ones dealing with ethnicity
until they have all the facts. It is difficult for laymen to fathom the
typical educators' obstinate devotion to this proposition. Even though
each of us makes judgments every day on the basis of fragmentary data;
even though each of us, including children, goes through the steps of
analysissome more aware of each step than others but through them
nonethelessit is of no moment to many schoolmen. Step into class-
rooms and the traditional sequence of facts first; discussion later is
painfully present. The possibility that fact presentation and analysis can
occur simultaneously is not considered. For ethnic education, this curi-
ous belief tied to the view of the youngster as a consumer of information
strengthens each delivery of missile after missile of facts.
t


[Page 122]
Ethnic Content and "White" Instruction105
On another level, for reasons unrelated to tradition and familiarity,
conventional teaching approaches are used which further force students
into acting like sponges. Consider who the teachers are in Puerto Rican,
Chicano, or black studies programs. Since every school system must
generate its own supply of ethnic studies instructors, two sources have
been tapped.
Wherever possible, ethnic teachers, regardless of their competence
and training, are dragooned into service; any white teacher, again re-
gardless of competence or training, who once expressed interest is
quickly recruited. Put teachers unprepared in terms of content into
classrodms and their vulnerability often forces them to lecture and use
any available textbook or workbook religiously.
Information is a smokescreen to hide shallowness. While this is usu-
ally the case with teachers dragged into service, for scholdily graduate
students (a second source of manpower) who are unfamiliar with class-
room management, content is also a convenient tool to quiet kids with a
barrage of woids, notes to take, and dates to remember. In bothcases
the defensive use of information.protects teachers' esteem while deluging
captive youngsters with facts.
What is disastrous about white instruction, ofcourse, is that children
who are thrown into a sea of information will not.come out cleansed of
self-hate and sparkling with ethnic consciousness. Thrown into such'a
sea, children drown. After all, how many times between the primary
years and graduation and from how many teachers can students be
informed of the brutality of slavery, the wickedness of Southern racists
and white oppression without yawning? Even those teachers driven
compulsively to preach about the iniquities of this country's treatment of
minority groups must sense that their studentswhen theyare of minor-
ity statusexistentially know oppression and carry its history with them.
And if that isn't apparent, then how can they ignore the explosion of
information on ethnicity from the media that envelops students daily?
Or the constant discussion, of race in the streets? Buried deep, then, in
the marriage between ethnic education and white instruction is a patron-
izing assumption about kids held by toomany_ teachers: Unknowing,
unthinking, and unaware, students can only absorb the Truth.
Less patronizing but just as simplistic (and inaccurate) is another
belief that crops up in virtually every ethnic educational effort. Many
programs are based upon the notion that information about ethnic
experience will remedy identity problems and instill in children aproper
appreciation of themselves. A school, the notiongoes, can inculcate a
sense of pride in a child about himself, his family, and his group.
Next to apple pie, waving the flag, and invoking images of Mom, there
is nothing as sacrosanct as the belief that the schools inculcate the right


[Page 123]
106TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
values and attitudes. But can schools develop responsible citizens? Can
they produce youths who respect the dignity of those less fortunate than
themselves? Probably not.
If there are serious reservations about the capacity of schools to turn
out men and women with minimal intellectual skills, areas in which
measurement is possible, then reservations increase when schools claim
that their graduates have certain values and attitudes, areas where evalu-
ation is notoriously unreliable. A case in point is patriotism.
Patriotism is an expected attitudinal outcome of the educational pro-
cess. The mandating of U.S. history, for example, is a conscious effort to
force kids into at least three years of exposure to American history.
National pride is the legislative as well as the educational objective. But
the record of the U.S. history courses in instilling pride is, at best,
ambiguous; at worst, utter failure. Dull books, dull courses, and low-
level patriotism have been part of the harvest from mandated U.S.
history.
If the teaching of American history isn't grim enough, turn to the
experience of civics education. Here the value aims are no less grand
than the making of "good" citizens who know their responsibilities to
the group and to themselves. Yet study after study documents that
instructional programs in civics have little or no impact upon the atti-
tudes and values of students, much less upon their behavior.
The point is that the failure or, charitably, the uncertain outcomes of
U.S. history and civics classes reveal the complexity of the interlocking
influence of the school, home, mass media, church, and friends. Pride in
group begins at birth and is constantly shaped by those forces. Family
and church, for example, are where a Polish child gets his sense of being
Polishnot the schools (unless, of course, Italian kids beat up Polish
kids on the playground and the schoolunintentionally--sharpens each
crying child's sense of himself).
Witness the experience of the Catholic parochial school system. That
exhaustive study, The Education of Catholic Americans, pointed to the
complexity of trying to instill and maintain certain values.' Andrew
Greeley and Peter Rossi pointed out that there were some changes in
attitude and certain kinds of religious behavior the longer Catholic
children went to school, but the study underscored the interrelationship
of family, church, and school. The writers suggested that rather than
causing the minimal level of religious allegiance they found in American
Catholics, the schools may be a result of it.
I have dealt with this issue of values and attitudes because it is
another article of faith that proponents of ethnic education have swal-
lowed whole from white instruction. Transferred to these programs,
what is supposed to happen is improved self-esteem, pride in race, and


[Page 124]
".. how a black parent reacts to his child's first questions about skin color. . . is far
more important than how much time that child spends in black studies programs."


[Page 125]
108TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
deeper involvement in the community. The sorry performance of U.S.
history and civics education and the ambiguous evidence from Catholic
schools suggest that the growth of ethnic consciousness and a reversal of
negative feelings about oneself would be doubtful outcomes of ethnic
education. If, for example, the slave heritage and individual and institu-
tional racism have produced the low self-esteem and self-hatred blacks
have, according to social scientists, and if they are correct in saying
these negative feelings are absorbed by the black family out of the
national bloodstream and passed on to children in their early yearsif
all of this is accuratethen how a black parent reacts to his child's first
questions about skin color and nappy hair and what "nigger" means is
far more important than how much time that child spends in black
studies programs. Yet even family influence is limited. Listen to a
mother describe her son:2
Although he has not yet attended kindergarten, he can both read and write,
and can accurately identify colors and forms with an acui:y beyond his years.
He collects American flags and pictures and ceramics of our national emblem.
... Helearned from somewhere on his own initiative the Pledge of Allegiance,
which he recites with deep fervor. ... My precious, precocious Mark is very
proud of his white, Anglo-Saxon heritage. But he's black: a beautifully carved
and polished piece of black American earth.
Cynthia Shepard took Mark South and placed him in an all-black
nursery school while she taught during the day.
The first evening, when I brought him home, he was in tears, writhing and
retching in painful confusion. "Why did you make me go to school with all
those Negroes?"
Then, just like NOW, I dig! Intellectuality had blocked my insight, creating
of me a blind broad and of my black son a white racist. In his innocenceor
highest sophistry, you seehe had intuitively perceived race not as a color but
as an attitude that he did not exemplify. My arguments to the contrary were
completely hushed by his own words: "You said I could be anything I choose,
and I chooie to be white; I am white."
And this happened before the public schools got Mark. Of course,
none of this is new. Kenneth B. Clark, Mary Ellen Goodman, and other
researchers documented the development of self-esteem and racial con-
cepts in pre-schoolers as early as the 1940's and 1950's. Modifying such
feelings is an enormous_task requiring skilled, compassionate human
beings and much interaction and individual attention as well as massive
amounts of patience. And hope.
There is no substantial evidence now that courses, books, programs,
or any such planned experience in public schools as they are presently


[Page 126]
Ethnic Content and "White" Instruction109
organized results in meaningful changes in attitudes and values. The
complex process of identity and attitude formation is very personal,
seldom public; identity and values are not products that can be pack-
aged and distributed to people out there who seemingly know not who
they are.
While too much of ethnic education has been married to white in-
struction, this has not been a shotgun marriage; both bride and bride-
groom marched down the aisle willingly. Proponents of ethnic studies
eager to legitimize their efforts embraced the durable and familiar appa-
ratus of course titles, approved book lists, lectures, tests, homework, and
the like. Conservative forces in the schools, duly supportive of that
apparatus, and anxious about the noise of curricular and instructional
reformers, welcomed ethnic studies with surprising ardor. While as
bedmates each may keep the other at arm's length, there is a clear
recognition of similar interests. The process of establishing the legiti-
macy of ethnic studies, traditionalists recognize, will damp down efforts
at reforming conventional practices because the current thrust of ethnic
studies in the schools is disseminating a Message; messages need senders
and receivers, a formula familiar and comfortable for those beating back
innovative changes.
To put it more directly, since the advocates of ethnic studies are the
"outs," getting "in," many have adopted, for various reasons, the forms
of white instruction and knowingly or unknowingly have reinforced
traditional instruction. In doing so, they threaten to kill off one of the
few reform efforts mounted to change instruction, especially in the social
sciences.
In the recent sweep of curricular and instructional reform, the accu-
mulation of factual knowledge has been secondary. Primary emphasis
has been placed upon students' developing the skills of comprehension,
analysis, and evaluation. Most resistant to these changes have been the
social sciences, particularly history. As tardy and slow as changes have
been, still, some significant strides have been undertaken to introduce
and sustain programs where children learn the skills of inquiry and
apply them to new information. Certainly no panacea, nonetheless these
reforms aimed at teaching children how to learn at least attempt to
crack the traditional role of the teacher and student and replace it with
one where students actively participate and question.
Ethnic education (where it focuses upon lifting self-esteem and catch-
ing up on omitted facts) and these infant reform efforts at a different
learning process produce a dilemma. For the fact-oriented, information
is intrinsically valuable and must be learned by the student; the product,
i.e., knowledge, is crucial and must be distributed to the children. For
the reformer, skills are critical, knowi,;dge is instrumental; a process is to


[Page 127]
"But most important, I see the raw power of ethnic content in charging the intellec-
tual batteries of youngsters."
be learned and assimilated. For the one, coverage of information is
essential; for the other, careful selectivity of concepts and information
act as a vehicle to teach skills. Most proponents of ethnic studies fail to
sense this dilemma and eagerly charge into the classroom, indiscrimi-
nately firing blast after blast of facts. A few, after discharging their load,
dimly perceive that there is more to ethnic content than facts.
But the angry, choked-up emotions of past decades explosively locked
into ethnic content will not permit knowledge to become secondary to
skill development.
There are, fortunately, some teachers who resolve the dilemma by
ignoring it. They see no rigid dichotomy, because in teaching through
process, one must teach content. Moreover, they see that there is no
such thing as a "true history" of, say, the black man or black literary
truth. They see that "telling it like it is" is only a code phrase for passing
along one's point of view, not rendering truth. They see that the only
advocacy worth pursuing is advocacy of inquiry and analysis. But most
110


[Page 128]
Ethnic Content and "White" InstructionIII
important, I see the raw power of ethnic content in charging the intellec-
tual batteries of youngsters. And it is here that Isense the enormous
possibilities for invigorating curriculum and instruction.
Ethnic content, carefully selected, contains the conflicts and dilemmas
of the human condition that inherently interest youngsters. From the
question of why the black man was permanently enslaved andnot the
white or red man to the question of whyso many black youths wear
afros and dashikis, fundamental issues of power, identity, and values
arise. A quick rebuttal would be that such issuescan be found in any
content. No doubt. But the point is that ethnic divisions and racismare
critical domestic issues now and have been since the foundingof this
country. Their continuing irresolution gives ethnic contentan emotional
voltage that will last as long as this society tolerates injustice.
Ethnic content can vibrate with electric energy. It isan immensely
effective tool to connect up with children if, and this isan enormous if,
teachers know how to select the material and howto use it in class.
Race, for example, is a controversial topic in both black andWila__
classrooms. As with any controversial issue, teachersmust be sensitive
and skilled. A teacher who walks into asex education class on the first
day and asks students to discuss their feeling about intercourse isa fool;
and a white teacher in a black class who iseager to talk about race and
tries to start a discussion by using the word "nigger" is both insensitive
and unskilled and, I should add, foolishly destructive.
Ethnic content can make contact with students. In the handsof a
craftsman, it can get youngsters to explore knowledge, develop skills,
and clarify values. Ethnic content can be usedto create interaction
between teachers and students and among students in sensitiveareas
often unexplored in class. Such things do happen occasionally in the
public schools.
W:-..?r,! it does happen, teachers intuitively know howto channel the
electrical charge of ethnic content into intellectualenergy. What they
know is that such content by itself is an inert body of knowledge. They
know that there is nothing intrinsically magical about it. What bringsit
to life, and I shudder at saying the obvious, is the effective teacher.
How Often the clich about the effective teacher is shoved aside and
forgotten! But the caliber of the teacher determines thesuccess or failure
of ethnic content. Those yawning students enrolled, for example, ina
Swahili class have discovered the truth buried in that clich.
And this is my final point. Ethnic content will be drained of its vitality
by white instruction as long as the community of students and educators
continues to formulate the problem of educational changeupon the


[Page 129]
-110 v.4! a 4 4u& Ny.44.41441, &)44,1.1.4yoy4414,4o4ULAkklY4,4444441y.:1 4e4:4104.4&10,.4. 4.: 4y& NI 0,4 ,41Yort,y ,


[Page 130]
_
Ethnic Content and "White" Instruction113
narrow base of curricular reform. We need teacher change, not so-called
curricular change. Sharp teachers can change the real curriculum, and
some were doing so long before alternative schools became fashionable.
If we focus upon the introduction of ethnic studies into the curriculum
with only an afterthought to the teachers and teaching strategies used
the future is fairly predictable. My guess is that two decades fromnow
ethnic studies will exist, but they will be a shell with all content sucked
dry by a pedantic instruction more concerned with form than substance.
Perhaps ethnic studies will go the way of Latin and Greek, given time
and dull educational leadership.
Putting more emphasis upon the effectiveness of teachers thanupon
establishing new forms may be politically impossible, considering the
vulnerability of public schools. Many educators have discovered that
they can get more bang from the buck by investing in curricular changes
and thereby creating the image of real reform. Consultants arrive,new
materials appear, course titles changereforms are under way. Thismay
be politically wise, but it is educationally destructive.
Some educators realize curriculum reform is just tinkering. But few
have the spine or support from superiors both to reorganize the school
and revitalize instruction through retraining of teachers. Thus creating
ethnic educational enclaves without introducing substantive changes
elsewhere will ensure political survival for a school but little else. It is
cheap. It projects the image of concern and modernity. But when ethnic
content is married to white instruction, kids will fall asleep in class.
Educators often forget that the first signs of student protest are not
placards and sit-ins but yawns.
FOOTNOTES
' Andrew Greeley and Peter Rossi, Education of Catholic Americans. Ch:.0: Aldine,
1966.
'Cynthia Shepard, The World Through Mark's Eyes," Saturday Review, la.,ary 18,
1969.


[Page 132]
Part Two
TEACHING ABOUT
ETHNIC MINORITY CULTURES
In Part One, the authors discuss some of the basic problems related to
race and ethnicity in American society, and suggest factors which the
teacher and his students must consider if meaningful ethnic studies
programs are to be formulated and implemented. These include issues
related to cultural pluralism, institutional racism, the meltingpot myth,
and the attitudes of t-achers and students. It is absolutely imperative
that serious attention be given to these factors in a sound ethnic studies
program.
However, an ethnic studies program must also have a carefully plan-
ned knowledge component. Teachers must know basic facts, concepts,
generalizations and theories about ethnic minority groups to teach about
these cultures intelligently. They must also be able to view minority
cultures from the points of view of the victims of oppression since
prevailing conceptions of these groups reflectan Anglo-Saxon bias.
Minority groups are often distorted, stereotyped and neglected intext-
books. The chapters in Part Two include basic information about differ-
ent American ethnic minority groups and present novel ways to inter-
pret their experiences. Strategies and materials for teaching about mi-
nority cultures are also suggested. An annotated bibliography isap-
pended to each chapter.
In the opening chapter, Chun-Hoon argues that Asian-Americansare
often seen in more positive ways than other ethnic minoritygroups
because of the economic success which a few of them enjoy. He suggests
that emphasis on the social mobility of a few has obscured the serious
115


[Page 133]
116TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
problems of the bulk who are poor. Chun-Hoon attempts to bring the
Asian-American experience into perspective. He sensitively describes the
problems of poor Asian-Americans, and gives a vivid picture of the
slums in which they live. He makes a plea for a comprehensive analysis
of the Asian-American experience, and argues that it should be taught
from a dual perspective: that of the American majority as well as that of
the Asian-American minority.
Ethnic studies has suffered largely because its goals are confused,
conflicting and ambiguous, contends Banks in the next chapter. He
reviews a number of alternative goals, and suggests that the main goal of
ethnic studies should be the same as the total social studies program: to
help students develop the ability to make reflective decisions so that they
can resolve personal problems, and through social action, influence
public policy and develop a sense of political efficacy. He then illus-
trates, using elements from Black Studies, how ethnic content can be-
come an integral part of an inquiry-oriented social studies curriculum
that focuses on decision-making skills. The conceptual framework de-
scribed by Banks can be used to study the other cultural groups dis-
cussed in Part Two.
A historical overview of the Chicano experience and some little
known but fascinating facts about Mexican Americans are presented in
the next chapter by Cortes. He describes the ways in which Chicanos,
have been culturally abused in textbooks and the stereotypic concepts
that are often applied in studying them. Cortes proposes five alternative
frames of reference which can be effectively used to analyze the Chicano
experience. The teacher will find his descriptions of strategies and mate-
rials very helpful.
Our educational system, argues Forbes in the following chapter, has
promoted a narrow and one-sided view of American history which is
Anglo-Saxon dominated. He attempts to redefine the concept of Ameri-
can, which includes a full recognition of the significant role played by
the first Americans in shaping our nation's past and present. Forbes
makes a compassionate plea for the teacher to teach the very essence of
Native American lifewhich is not material elements such as baskets
and housesbut a system of basic values which he believes can help
immensely to solve our intractable social problems.
The final chapter in Part Two focuses on a group of Americans who
have been highly invisible in most discussions of the culturally different:
Puerto Rican Americans. Cordasco and Castellanos vividly delineate
some of the unique problems which these children experience in school
and describe some ways in which they can be solved. Arguing that the
melting pot theory has not and will not work with Puerto Rican Ameri-
cans, the authors suggest that bilingual education programs are abso-


[Page 134]
Teaching About Ethnic Minority Cultures117
lutely essential for Spanish-speaking children to succeed in school. They
focus their discussion on bilingual education because of their strong
conviction that Puerto Rican students will not succeed in any subject
areaincluding the social studiesuntil programs are structured in
languages which they can read and comprehend. Most of the conclu-
sions which the authors derive can also be applied to Chicano students.
Suggested Teaching Strategies
Elizabeth 0. Pearson is the author of
"Suggested Teaching Strategies" which
appear at the end of Chapters 6, 9, 10, 11,
and 12.
Elizabeth 0. Pearson
Elizabeth 0. Pearson is a Lecturer in Social Studies Education anda
Ph.D. candidate at the University of Washington, Seattle. She graduated
from Northwestern University and received her M.Ed. from the Univer-
sity of Washington. Ms. Pearson taught social studies and language arts
in the Glencoe (Illinois) Public Schools and was a Teacher Participant in
the Tri-University Project at the University of Washington. She was a
member of the History Education Project sponsored by the American
Historical Association and has served as a Consultant to the Continental
Can Company. Ms. Pearson has contributed toProfessional Growth for
Teachersand teaching strategy exercises toTeaching Strategies for the
Social Studies: Inquiry, Valuing and Decision-Making.


[Page 135]
r
Lowell K.Y. Chun-Moon
LOWELL KOON YING CHUN-HOON is Editor-in-Chief of the Am-
erasia Journal, which is published at the Asian-American Studies Center
at the University of California, Los Angeles. Mr. Chun-Hoon is a gradu-
ate of Yale University, where he completed a thesis on "The Anomalous
and the Expected: Anson Burlingame and the Anti-Chinese Movement
in California, 1848-1902." Mr. Chun-Hoon has taught high school En-
glish to gifted inner-city youth and courses on Asian-American studies
at the University of California, Los Angeles. In 1971 he was a member
of the Pacific Rim Education Project and was appointed by the Califor-
nia State Department of Education to serve on an Ethnic Education
Task Force to evaluate social studies textbooks. His articles and book
reviews have appeared in the Amerasia Journal, Chinese Awareness and
The Honolulu Advertiser. He contributed to a forthcoming book, Asian
American: Psychological Perspectives.
118


[Page 136]
LOWELL K. Y. CHUN-HOON
6
Teaching the
Asian-American Experience
Learning from History
If one of the primary stereotypes of Asian persons in America has been
that they are passive and docile, it is equally true that their historical
experience has also been seen as compliant, flexible, and malleable.
Non-Asian militants are always likely to be dumbfounded, for example,
when one politely introduces the all-Nisei 442nd combat regiment, the
most decorated unit of World War II, which fought heroically against
fascism in Italy while 100,000 of their own people were interned in
concentration camps in the United States, and only the most cantanker-
ous of minority groups will not recoil in shame when reference is made
to the 1960 census figures that reveal Chinese-American families with a
higher average family income than the average American family. In-
deed, there is literally something to please everyone in the varied history
of Asians in the United States: images of slimy Filipino sensuality for
the perverse; the enormous imbalance in the historical ratio of Chinese
men to Chinese women for the misogynist; and riots, harassment, and
lynchings too numerous to mention to satiate the appetite for violence of
the most vindictive among us. Even the most jaded masochist will surely
find refuge in the statement by Yung Wing, a Westernized Chinese
official and the first Asian graduate of an American university (Yale,
Class of 1854), that he would remain celibate because, "There is no
Chinese woman I could marry, and no American lady who would marry
me."'
119


[Page 137]
120 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Despite such versatility of content, Asian-American history nonethe-
less remains neglected in present secondary and intermediate school
curricula. When Asians in America are discussed at all they are dis-
cussed illustratively or tangentially as examples of particular generaliza-
tions which textbook writers may wish to stressthe cultural diversity of
American pluralism or the fundmental equity of a social system in which
certain Asian minorities appear to have risen above discrimination to
success.
Sometimes, however, textbook authors fail to reach even these paltry
half-truths. Voices of the Americas. a 1971 Leswing publication, noted,
for example, that "Immigration laws changed frequently," then adding,
"In 1882, not only were the Chinese excluded, but also criminals, pau-
pers, and the insane."Z Another book, The Human Adventure by Capel-
lutti and Grossman, found Asian society a useful means of reinforcing in
students the traditional belief in the superiority of Western over Eastern
civilization: "In 1853, the American Commander Perry visited Japan
and introduced Western ways. Within twenty years new political sys-
tems, new educational methods, and new industrial plans brought the
Japanese into the modern world."' Other books, however, have simply
overestimated the strengths and capacities of the Republic itself: "Note
how long ago unfavorable attitudes about America began to grow in
China," suggests the teacher's manual to The Social Sciences: Concepts
and Values, a fifth-grade text by Harcourt Brace and Jovanovich.
"Why did the United States government let this happen?"'
Illustrations such as these are not intended to be overtly offensive or
injurious. They are merely contrite statements of what the authors
accept to be facts. The writers do not intend to denigrate Chinese people
by lumping them with criminals, paupers, and the insane; they intend to
mollify the existence of anti-Chinese legislative racism by presenting it
in a broader social context. The comment that the Japanese rapidly
adopted Western political systems, educational methods, and industrial
plans hardly endeavors to insult traditional Japanese mores, but rather
praises the flexible intelligence of a resourceful people capable of shed-
ding the fetters of a medieval past for the resilient technology of the
future. Lastly, the effort to understand why the United States govern-
ment allowed hostility to grow in China towards this nation is an
attempt to comprehend the defect in universal affection for America, not
an attempt to swindle from the Chinese people their sacred right of
emotional self-determination.
All of these statements, however, have something further in common
beyond the innocence of their intentions. Consciously or unconsciously,
they work to rationalize American behavior for the student. In the
process, they foreclose any discussion of real historical content in a
8


[Page 138]
-t.
"Unless... we can understand the relocation of Japanese-Americans during World
War 1 1 both f r o m the perspective of those who were interned as w e l l as...those who
interned them, we achieve only a partial understanding of the event itself."
manner that is fundamentally unscholarly and irrational. The omission
of Asian-Americans or a neglect for their sensitivities in these books can
only inform the reader that this group of people is marginal and irrele-
vant, if not absolutely expendable. Thus, these books indoctrinate rather
than educate the student, and by excluding Asian-Americans from seri-
ous consideration v y treating them insensitively, they can only lay the
foundation for the growth and perpetuation of anti-Asian attitudes.
Such indoctrination, in turn, has two specific consequences. The first
and most obvious of these is that such teaching works to suppress the
history of almost 2,000,000 Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and Filipinos in
the United States. Second, and interrelated, such indoctrination pre-
cludes the possibility of Asian-American minorities defining their own
experience, both for themselves and for the larger society of which they
are a part.
In some ways the ability to define a group's experience in the prevail-
ing channels of communication is the ability to control that group in
mass society by regulating the perception of that group for society-as-a-
whole. A group such as Asian-Americans, who constitute at best one
percent of the American population, are particularly vulnerable to such
forms of control, and education, as a primary agent of mass socializa-
121


[Page 139]
122TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
tion, bears a large responsibility for ensuring that such minority groups
are not intellectually misrepresented or colonized by the process of
learning itself.
This in turn can only be assured when the experience of minority
groups in the United States is taught both from a majority and a
minority perspective. Unless, for example, we can understand the reloca-
tion of Japanese-Americans during World War n both from the per-
spective of those who were interned as v -11 as from the perspective of
those who interned them, we achieve only 4 partial understanding of the
event itself. For in this instance, the fullness of the historical event is not
measured by the inconsequential effects experienced by the overwhelm-
ing American majority, but the extreme effects experienced by the Japa-
nese minority. History is not made or experienced impartially, and
attempts to report it or teach it neutrally all too often merely neutralize
the real significance of events themselves. Accordingly, the major imper-
ative of teaching the Asian-American experience, or any minority's
history, is the ability to represent these dual perspectives fairly and
completely.
To be sure, an accurate representation of these dual perspectives is
not always possible, for Asian-American history itself remains inade-
quately researched. Source materials in Asian languages are relatively
sparse since many Asian immigrants were illiterate laborers and many of
the writings that were authored are now deposited in Asia or in private
collections that have not been accessible to scholars. One principal result
of this lack of research in Asian language sources is the further difficulty
that what Asian-American history there is, is primarily an analysis of
what was done to Asians rather than what was done by Asians. The
resultant impression of a passive and fatalistic acceptance of this treat-
ment by Asian immigrants themselves may thus be wholly unjustified,
although the impact of those materials now available would tend to
create that idea.
In the present context, then, an adequate portrayal of the Asian-
American experience would probably have to content itself with certain
rudimentary and by no means definitive explorations of Asian-American
history. While such surveys would not produce ultimate judgments
about the Asian-American experience, they should raise instructive
questions about American society and about the traditional stereotypes
of the role of Asians in American history, simply by offering an alterna-
tive perspective to what is currently taught: an Asian-American perspec-
tive on Asian-American history. In establishing this perspective here,
heavy emphasis will be placed on the history of Chinese in America
because of the author's own nationality, the preponderance of recent
scholarship in this area, and bt.,:ause, as the first Asian immigrants to


[Page 140]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience123
America, the Chinese established patterns that were largely duplicated
by the other Asian immigrants who followed them later.
An Asian-American Perspective on Asian-American History
One simple prerequisite for teaching Asian-American history from an
Asian-American perspective is an adequate representation of the contri-
butions of Asian-Americans to American life. A survey of fifteen basic
social studies texts recently adopted in grades five through eight in
California reveals that none of the books even comprehends the basic
extent to which Asians were instrumental and indispensable in develop-
ing the West. No book, for example, mentioned that Chinese revenues
paid to the Foreign Miner's Tax of 1850 constituted the principal source
of funding for the California state government from 1850-1870. Yet,
during the period from 1850-1854, Chinese paid approximately 50 per-
cent of the tax, and between 1855-1870, Chinese contributed 98 percent
of the revenues, in effect financing the operation of the California state
government during the latter sixteen years.
More directly, Chinese constituted 1/3 of the state's farm labor in
1884 and 1/2 of it by 1884. Fifty of sixty major vegetable peddlers and
wholesalers in Los Angeles during the same period were also Chinese,
and tule lands reclaimed through the efforts of Chinese workers were
valued at $289,000,000 alone. Finally, and perhaps most important, as
many as 10,000 Chinese labored to complete the transcontinental rail-
road during the peak years of employment, 1867-1868. Asked in con-
gressional hearings to assess, "In your opinion, would those roads have
been built without Chinese labor?", Mr. William Hollister replied:
I do not see how they could have been built. They might have been built but
at such expense that they would be almost worthless. I do not see how a
bushel of wheat could have been carried over the land; it would have cost
more than the wheat was worth to transport it'
Although statistical quantification is less available for Japanese, Kore-
ans, and Filipinos their own contributions to the growth of the Western
agricultural economy has also been impressive. Japanese small farmers
furthered the development begun by Chinese workers after their exclu-
sion from the United States and Filipinos became the primary source of
farm labor when the cry for Japanese exclusion arose.
However, these enormous contributions also raise disquieting social
issues that should be explored in the classroom. Coupled with the indis-
pensability of black slave labor in the development of Southern agricul-
ture, the contributions of Asian immigrants radically question to what
extent the agricultural development of this country must not fairly be
attributed to the industry of underpaid Asian indentured laborers and


[Page 141]
124TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
colonized black peoples. In a larger sense the entire history of the
recruitment and utilization of Asian workers in America during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries poses other pertinent questions about
the general relationship between racism directed at exploited minority
laborers and the economic development of this country. For example, it
is often supposed that overt forms of colonial slavery were only prac-
ticed against African slaves prior to 1865. Yet very similiar attempts to
enforce almost identical forms of absolute, though theoretically tempo-
rary, control over Asian laborers were also attempted from the very first
arrival of Chinese immigrants sometime around 1850.
Although there was a distinctly favorable welcome accorded to early
Chinese immigrants from certain quarters, in 1852 one direct effort at
formalizing quasi-colonial control over them was attempted. A bill intro-
duced by California State Senator Tingley, "An Act to Enforce Con-
tracts and Obligations to Perform Work and Labor," proposed that
Chinese workers be allowed to sell their services under contracts for
periods up to a maximum of ten years' time, thus creating a legally
enforceable variety of slave labor.'
This bill did fail, however, but the reasons for its failure are also
instructive. A qualified humanitarian belief in the ideal of frontier indi-
vidualism and personal freedom in one direction reinforced less noble
desires by other segments of the population to keep the West white
man's country by excluding any institutions of slavery, and therefore,
slaves themselves. Another important reason was the belief of white
workingmen, expressed by State Senator Philip Roach, that such a bill
would give "to capital the hand and heart of labor," while allowing the
Chinese government itself, "if it be to their advantage" to unleash "every
malefactor in the prisons...here as contract laborers." A government
"as skilled in tact as is that of the Celestial Empire," the Senator
reasoned, "could not fail to perceive the advantages of permitting its
criminal element to emigrate." Thus, in this particular instance, the
desire to preserve the racial purity of California combined with the class
interests of white workingmen to defeat the interests of capital and the
possibility oflcgalized slavery.
Such an attempt at overt colonization might be dismissed as an
aberration if it were not for the fact that other parallel incidents are
numerous. In 1868, an unsuccessful attempt was made to colonize
48,600 square miles of lower California through the importation of
10,000 Chinese who were to be required to work and develop the land
for several years in exchange for passage to the United States, though no
indication in the proposed plan gives any evidence that anything but
steerage fare and supplies would be awarded to the Chinese.' Simultane-
ously, in Memphis, Tennessee, $260,000 was raised to import Chinese


[Page 142]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience125
laborers by the Arkansas River Valley Immigration Company in an
effort to replace newly-emancipated black slaves. "Small farms and
white labor or large farms and coolie labor," the Franklin St. Mary's
Planters Journal had speculated, "may save the land." With the coming
of Chinese laborers, the Lexington Observer and Reporter had warned
freedmen, "the tune...will not be 'forty acres and a mule,' but 'work
nigger or starve.' "p
While these many efforts to institute a formal and legitimate system of
wage slavery failed with the Chinese, the indentured servitude that
evolved informally was similar to slavery itself. Whether involuntarily
deceived by ruse or voluntarily seeking to escape poverty, Chinese
workers from Southern China signed thousands of individual contracts
bringing them to American soil in return for several years' labor either
for opportunistic fellow countrymen or white capitalists. Because most
Chinese immigrants considered their stay in the United States a tempo-
rary sojourn and emigrated without their wives or family, the Chinese
family and district associations to which they were indentured exerted
enormous control over these immigrants through their ability to regu-
late, in cooperation with American steamship companies, return passage
to China. The associations also controlled available outlets of recreation,
such as gambling and prostitution, which were, for the overwhelmingly
male population (twenty-seven men per female in 1890), the chief diver-
sions from labor. In any event, this informal influx of cheap indentured
labor which evaded formal constitutional provisions against slavery after
1865 proved ideal for the manpower needs of the developing frontier, at
least from a purely economic standpoint. By 1860, 34,933 Chinese had
arrived in California through this system and by 1880 this number had
swelled to 75,132. Chinese also provided badly needed labor in the
service sector of the economyin laundries, restaurants, and occasion-
ally in semi-skilled trades such as cigar making.
Similar systems of control were imposed on other Asian immigrants
and attempts to use Japanese laborers in Hawaii on sugar plantations
adhered more closely to the traditional colonial model. When the is-
lands' sugar industry expanded in production from 4,286 lbs. in 1837 to
17,127,161 lbs. in 1868, the need to import cheap labor became acute. In
1868, 148 Japanese emigrated to Hawaii on three-year contracts which
provided only four dollars a month in pay, half of which was usually
withheld until completion of the contract. Conditions, quite similar to
those experienced by blacks in the South, were so oppressive that three
workers committed suicide, although some 30,000 Japanese ultimately
arrived in Hawaii from 1885-1894.
Almost simultaneously, other attempts were made on the mainland
United States to use the Japanese farmers' skill in intensive cultivation


[Page 143]
126TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
to transform other areas of California into productive agricultural lands.
In 1869, Henry Schnell, a German, imported twenty-six Japanese colo-
nists to cultivate tea and silk and to establish-the Wakamatsu Colony
near Coloma, California, but the experiment failed. Similar attempts
were also made in 1886 near Santa Cruz and Vacaville-Winters in 1888.
The former attempt ended in failure, but the limiteduse of eighty
Japanese as laborers alongside the Chinese in the latter case met with
more success. Thereafter, Japanese immigration to America continued,
reaching a peak between 1901-1908 of some 127,000 people.
Korean and Filipino immigration followed a similar pattern and were
also exploited as cheap labor. Both peoples were actively recruited by
growers for Hawaii's sugar plantations, like the Japanese, and both
became disillusioned with the low wages and harsh demands of their
condition. Ninety-three Koreans arrived first in 1903 and their number
rapidly increased to 6,647 in 1904, rising eventually to 11,000 in 1905,
when the Korean government stopped emigration. Wages ran roughly
70 per ten-hour day in Honolulu, but railway laboron the mainland
U.S. yielded $1.20-$1.50 per day, luring many workers away from the
tyranny of the plantations to scattered settlements across the West
Coast. Because of their small numbers Koreans remained a minority-
minority, essentially indistinguishable from the Chinese and Japanese in
California. Ironically, only in 1913 when eleven Korean farmworkers
were mistaken by whites for Japanese in the Hemet Valley did they
become a cause Mare, provoking growers in the valley to pack them
aboard a train and angrily send them back to Los Angeles. Sensitive
relations between rapidly modernizing Japan and the United States
brought prompt State Department pressure to bear in defense of the
perceived insult to the Japanese and apologies were duly issued. Signifi-
cantly, however, the Koreanswho had been annexed by Japan in 1910
and had always struggled to rid themselves of the yoke of foreign
dominationresented this error and strenuously resisted attempts by
the Japanese Consulate to file protests on their behalf.1
Filipino immigration, finally, was conceived to conform to an identi-
cal design. As the Gentleman's Agreement of 1908 and subsequent
restrictions on Japanese immigration to America were formulated,new
sources of labor were necessary to continue the harvest of sugar cane on
Hawaiian plantations. Recently annexed in the Spanish-American War
of 1898, the Philippines provided a fertile hunting ground for labor
recruitment, and from 1907-1919 25,000 Filipinos were persuaded to
migrate to the Hawaiian Islands to replace the diminishing numbers of
Japanese and Chinese laborers. From there, Filipinos gradually mi-
grated to the mainland and assumed roles in agriculture similar to those
of the Chinese, Koreans, and Japanese before them)'


[Page 144]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience127
The significance of this exploitation does not lie in the mere fact that
Asian immigrants were underpaid and abused, for early European immi-
grants often endured equal hardships and equal forms of oppression.
What is significant is that all of these varied Asian groups, each repre-
senting a separate country and unique culture, encountered a similar or
identical pattern of racial oppression and economic exploitation. Just as
all groups were utilized as a supply of cheap labor for the demands of
the rapidly expanding western economy, so were all of the groups
effectively excluded from the United States by law.
The most important of these laws, however, were the prototype Chi-
nese Exclusion Laws which barred Chinese laborers from entering the
United States in 1882 in direct contravention of the Senate-ratified
Burlingame Treaty of 1868 which guaranteed the rights of reciprocal
travel between China and America for citizens of either country for
purposes of travel, trade, or study. Other principal extensions and varia-
tions of the basic exclusion laws were passed in 1888, 1892, 1902, and
"... all of these varied Asian groups, each representing a separate country and
unique culture, encountered a similar or identical pattern of racial oppression and
economic exploitation."


[Page 145]
128TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
1924. These laws denied departing Chinese immigrantsthe right to
return to America after they had already departed, despite constitutional
provisions against the ex post facto nature of suchlegislation, and also
prevented the creation of natural Chinese families inAmerica by deny-
ing married sojourners the right to bring theirspouses to America, while
further passing anti-miscegenation statutes against marriageto white
women.
With the Japanese, a similar series of-laws.were passed, aimedchiefly
at reducing their substantial agricultural holdings, which in 1919totaled
sixty-seven million dollars in crop value alone,or about 10 percent of
the total agricultural value of California'scrops. The Alien Land Law of
1913, for example, forbade alien Japanese from owningproperty, and in
1924 they too were formally excluded from the UnitedStates. To com-
plete the pattern, Filipinos, who couldnot be excluded because their
homeland was technically a possession of the UnitedStates, were as-
signed an immigration quota of fifty Filipinosper year in 1935. In
addition, President Roosevelt offered free provision forrepatriation to
the Philippines for any Filipinos who wishedto return to their home-
land.
The concomitant processes of labor exploitation and legaldiscrimina-
tion also took place within the context ofan incredible array of illegal
personal violence that was directed against Asianimmigrants, chiefly,
though not exclusively, the Chinese. At leastas early as 1852, wide-
spread agitation and harassment of the Chinesewas occurring in the
mining regions of Chinese Camp, North Forks, HorseshoeBay, New
Kanaka Camp, Tuolome Colony, Vallecito, Douglas Flat,Sacramento
Bar, Coyote Flat, Sand Flat, Rock Creek, and Buckeye.By 1862, the
California Legislature's Joint Select Committeeon the Chinese popula-
tion was itself reporting that
Your committee were furnished with a list of eighty-eight Chinamen,who are
known to have been murdered by Collectors of the Foreign Miner'sLicense
Taxsworn officers of the law. But two of the murderers have beenconvicted
and hanged. Generally, they have been allowed toescape with the slightest
punishment.
The above number of Chinese who have been robbedand murdered comprise,
probably, a very small proportion of those who havebeen murdered but they
are all which the records of the different societies or companies in the city
shown
More sensational outbursts followed in the 1870's and 1880'sin such
locales as Los Angeles, where nineteen Chinesewere killed in an 1871
riot after the shooting ofa white policeman, and in Rock Springs,
Wyoming in 1885, where Chinese were roundedup and driven out of


[Page 146]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience129
town and assaulted. At the conclusion of the massacre, twenty-eight
Chinese were found dead and property damage assessed at $148,000 was
recounted. Similar but less drastic riots occurred in Seattle, Tacoma,
Snake River, San Francisco, and elsewhere throughout the West.
While the Japanese managed to escape incidents of extreme mass
violence, to some degree because they emigrated as entire families and
thus aroused less hostility, they received no less harassment or general
maltreatment. Especially when Japanese socialists entered the United
States in the 1890's and successfully organized workers' strikes in Fresno
and Bakersfield against growers, they prompted angry physical reprisals
from whites. Finally, in World War II collective wartime hysteria and
the legacy of accumulated anti-Asian racism culminated in the incarcer-
ation of 100,000 Japanese-Americans, although throughout the war no
case of sabotage against this country by Japanese was ever discovered.
With Filipinos, riots in Exeter, California, in 1929 and the Watsonville
Riots of 1930, where a Filipino was shot through the heart after white
female entertainment was employed at a Filipino party in that city, bear
ample testimony to shared hostility against Asians.
Although the comprehensive analysis of Asian-American history or
the history of any of the particular Asian minorities has yet to be
written, information like the above should not be obscured and deserves
presentation as the very real and brutal heritage of some two million
American citizens who directly or indirectly bear the scars of this legacy
of hatred. Even more important, the cyclical nature of the successive
exploitation and exclusion throughout the period from 1850 to 1935
demands further scrutiny.
In observing this pattern in conjunction with the development of
modern racism in industrial America, one sociologist, Stanford Lyman,
has argued in his bookThe Asian in the Westthat, "If American racism
may be defined as the attempt to impose white Anglo-Saxon culture on
the inhabitants of a continent, then two epochs may be distinguished."
The first of these, he maintains, is the total exclusion of non-whites,
characterized by "total institutionalization of the non-white population
on plantations and reservations." This phase lasted from 1607 to roughly
the twentieth century. The second phase from the turn of the twentieth
century to the present substitutes "segmented, partial, institutionalized
racism in a wide variety of arenas of action for the abandoned and
moribund method of total incarceration." Thus, in this context, "the
pivotal group for the study of this transition from total to partial institu-
tionalized racism is the Asian and especially the Chinese."
It is this challenging and controversial hypothesis which Lyman pro-
poses that distinctly separates the consideration of European immigra-
tion and Asian immigration to America. The American response to


[Page 147]
130TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Asians needs to be considered within the framework Lymansuggests as
well as the traditional arguments one finds in textbooks whichcharacter-
ize anti-Asian racism as an act of deviance fomented by frontier yahoos,
or worse, the "unfair" labor competition and demeaning ability Asians
possessed to survive "inhuman" and "debasing" conditions. Theseare
dangerously reminiscent of the xenophobia AFL leader Samuel Gom-
pers proffered in his famous anti-Chinese tract, "Asiatic Coolieism:
Meat .vs. Rice."
Even if one chooses to reject Lyman's thesis,one thing is abundantly
clear: the history of anti-Asian legislation and expulsion in California
and the United States constitutes a clear statement of the inability of the
democratic process itself to prevent assaults against the rights ofnon-
white persons in this country. As earlyas 1854, the California Supreme
Court case of People v. Hall stipulated that Chinese fell under the
purview of legislation that provided that "No Black,or Mulatto person,
or Indian shall be allowed to give evidence in favor of, or against,a
white man," thus effectively denying Chineseany, much less equal,
protection under the law. Separate schoolswere authorized for Chinese,
and later Japanese, children, and in San Francisco specificordinances
were passed to discourage Chinese immigration, such as forms of taxa-
tion on the entry of Chinese immigrants into Americanports, as well as
anti-queue legislation, cubic air ordinances applied onlyto overcrowded
Chinese dwellings, and statutes that restricted the hours in which itwas
legally permissible to iron clothes.
Invisible Communities: Modern Asian Ghettoes
In more contemporary terms, what isor is not taught about the
present status of Asians in America has a substantial impacton social
conditions within Asian-American communities themselves. Notext-
books, for example, even attempt to analyze the fate of remaining Asian
ethnic enclaves, such as Chinatowns, Little Tokyos,or Manilatowns. Yet
instructively, an examination of these communities reveals problems of
drug addiction, overcrowding, deteriorating housing,unemployment,
and political powerlessness that rival or exceed the problemsof any
barrio, reservation, or black ghetto in America.
San Francisco's Chinatown, for example, servesas one illuminating
case study. The core area of Chinatown has a population density of 231
persons per acre, the second highest density in the country, as compared
with 33 persons per acre in surrounding San Francisco. The tuberculosis
rate in the community is also the highest in the city, and suicidesare
committed three times more frequently than the nationalaverage. Sev-
enty-five percent of the families who live thereearn less than $6000 a


[Page 148]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience131
year, 13 percent of the adults are unemployed, and 45 percent of the
population in Chinatown's core area never attended school, though in
the greater Chinatown area the median level of education is 8.0 years as
compared to 12.0 years in San Francisco at large." 67 percent of tne
community's housing is substandard in the Chinatown core area, and 51
percent is substandard in the greater Chinatown region. A random
sampling of immigrant employment by Lillian Sing of the Chinese
Newcomers Service Center found under-employment to be striking. Ms.
Sing found a Chinese doctor employed as a laundryman, a sweater-
weaver as a cook, a factory owner as a janitor, another Chinese doctor
as an errand boy, and a newspaper reporter, teacher, and accountant all
employed as busboys. Testimony before the California Fair Employ-
ment Practice Commission also revealed that only 4.3 percent of the
city's civil servants and 1.7 percent of the city's construction workers
were Asian-Americans in a city that is 14 percent Chinese alone. Finally,
the subject of police-community relations deserves special attention for
an unforgettable remark by Sergeant Louis E. Colobro in response to a
suggestion by District Court of Appeals Justice John Molinari that
police-community relations could be improved by bringing minorities
and police representatives closer together. Quipped Colobro: "I don't
know what they mean, whether we have to date homosexuals or dance
with Chinese."
These particular statistics about San Francisco are roughly matched
by conditions in New York Chinatown, and Los Angeles or Boston
Chinatowns do not fare substantially better, though, because of smaller
size, their problems are less intense and potentially more manageable.
What is of significance, though, is the invisibility of these problems in
school textbooks which concentrate on paying homage to successful
Asian-Americans instead. This is especially troublesome because harp-
ing on the model minority stereotype of Asian-Americans creates a
resistance on the part of the wider society to respond to legitimate needs
for change. Boston's Chinatown is an excellent, if depressing, example of
this problem. Although its community of 8,000 has a median family
income that is $530 less than that of the next lowest anti-poverty target
area in the greater Boston area, Chinatown itself is not classified as an
anti-poverty target area."
Further, curricula that remain oblivious to these problems reinforce
the entrenched conservatism of oligarchic community elites such as the
Chinese Six Companies in San Francisco or the Chinese Benevolent
Association in New York who continue to dominate the economic life of
these communities only by resisting external pressures for change that
would force increased wages, increased contact with external society,
and an erosion of the carefully constructed networks of social and


[Page 149]
132TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
political control they have established over the decades. Significantly,
assaults on their studiously cultivated image of community propriety
and prosperity in the media of the wider society are one of the few forms
of petitioning to which they have been forced to respond.
Despite such squalor in these communities, there are alsomany
Asian-Americans who have been economically successful in the wider
society. Exposure to these contradictions of extreme wealth and extreme
poverty in a single ethnic group ate in fact one of the best reasons for
studying the Asian-American experience and contrasting it with other
minority groups. Insights into the process and problems of acculturation
are many, and students would dc well to ponder the forces that moti-
vated one successful Chinese person interviewed by Kit Louis in the
1930's to lament that, "I have not heard much about Chinatown. It
seemed such a dingy, dirty place. I went there as littleas possible and
think I was rather ashamed of ;t." Something should be said, too, for
recognizing the dilemmas and cultural conflicts of minor:ty membersas
in the case of one woman discussed in the 1962 Cattell Reporton New
York Chinatown. Asked to describe the relationship between the first
and second generations in the community, she replied:
People like me are emotionally tired all the time. Whenwe were children we
gave to our parents; we followed their orders; we never asked for anything.
Now, our children are Americanized; they make demandson us and don't
give us anything so we feel like we have given emotionally allour lives and
never received."
Psychological Colonization:
Imposed Identity and Its Consequences
Ultimately, it is this unexplored region of personal identity and indi-
vidual personality that needs expression, and acceptance,on its own
terms. Both in the American overseas record of neocolonial exploitation
of Asia and the anti-Asian aggressions in nineteenth- and twentieth-
century America, there runs a basic rejection of the humanity and
equality of non-white races. The images of John Chinaman in the U.S.A.
and the slope-headed Celestials abroad were similar and commonly
debased.
Extraordinary vituperations were heard in the popularpress against
Chinese in the United States, such as the following statement from the
Annals of San Francisco in 1855:
The manners and habits of the Chinese are very repugnant to Americans in
California. Of different language, blood, religion, and character, inferior in
most mental and bodily qualities, the Chinaman is looked upon by othersas
somewhat inferior. It is needless to reason upon the matter. Those who have


[Page 150]
"Ultimately, it is this unexplored region of personal identity and individual personal-
ity that needs expression, and acceptance, on its own terms."
mingled with "celestials" have commonly felt before long an uncontrollable
sort of loathing against them. "John's" person does not smell very sweetly; his
color and the features of his face are unusual; his penuriousness, his lying,
knavery, and natural cowardice are proverbial; he dwells apart from white
persons, herding only with countrymen, unable to communicate his ideas to
such as are not of his nation, or to show the better part of his nature. He is
poor and mean, somewhat slavish and crouching, and is despised by the
whites, who would only laugh in derision if even a divine were to pretend to
place the two races on an equality."
Public officials also confirmed this image. San Francisco's Mayor Kel-
loch noted in 1880 that "the vital evil of Chinese cheap labor" was "not
so much that it cheapens labor; it degrades it," and he added that
Chinese places of residence "are absolutely without proper ventilation,
and it seems unaccountable how human beings can live in them for a
single night. The sickening stench arising from thousands of such foul
places in the very heart of our city would breed a plague in a week, if
Providence, in His mercy, did not open the Golden Gate and pour the
133


[Page 151]
/
134TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
cleansing breezes of the sea over us." Still, if Mayor Kelloch was simply
guilty of exaggerating actual zqnditions, men such as Dr H.H. Tolland
marshalled the credentials of science to buttress their racist fantasies
about Chinese prostitution. "I have seen boys eight and ten years old,"
he reported
with diseases they told me they contracted on Jackson Street. It is astonishing
how soon they commence indulging in that passion. Some of the worst cases
of syphilis I have seen in my life occurred in children not more than ten or
twelve years old....
In answer to what extent these diseases come from prostitutes he said:
I suppose nine-tenths. When these persons come to me, I ask them where they
got the disease, and they generally tell me Chinese women. ... I am satisfied
that nearly all the boys in town, who have venereal diseases, contracted them
in Chinatown. They have no difficulty there, for the prices are so low they can
go whenever they please. The women do not care how old the boys are,
v Nether five years old or more, so long as they have the money. ... It is my
opinion that the maintenance of this population, instead of advancing civiliza-
tion, is a crime against it."
Such images, combined with the image of Chinese overseas, led Robert
McClellan to conclude in his. recent study The HeathenChineez A
Study of American Attitudes Towards China, 1890-1905that
The keystone to American policy in the Far East was the myth of Chinese
inferiority. The myth was developed by Americans to shield themselves from
the apparent threat to America's superiority offered by China's civilization.
The Far Eastern policy of the United States was designed to fit the American
image of China, not the actual conditions of the Orient."
Even at the height of paternalistic American benevolence a constant
attempt at restructuring and reshaping Asian identity has been evident.
The indemnity scholarships to China made after the anti-foreign Boxer
Rebellion of 1900, as one instance, have often been hailed as a prime
example of American generosity towards conquered peoples. In reality
though, it was only a partially benign attempt to educate and American-
ize a young student elite in China that would return sympathetic to the
views of American society and its entrepreneurial class. Similarly, the
reformist efforts of such educational institutions as Yale-in-China were
publicly proclaimed as humanitarian endeavors to save China throlgh
the light of Western learning. As Henry Luce, father of the later editor
of Time Magazine, had expressed the hope, "We may work together for
God, for China, and for Yale." Yet, in reality, such programs, taught as
they were, revealed more sophisticated means of expressing the basic
sense of superiority felt by Americans towards Chinese. Wrote Jerry


[Page 152]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience135
Israel in an astute book on Progressivism and the Open Door:, America
and China, 1905-1921:
China was to be a market for all types of early twentieth century
progressive American reform. It was this idea of China as a tabula
rasa for American interests that provided a most revealing link be-
tween domestic anu diplomatic attitudes. Canton, like Chicago, was to
be cleansed of crime and corruption. Chinawas to be remade in the
American image."
Sadly, even the many missionaries who earnestly and sincerely worked
for reform, bringing their foreign gospel and zeal to Chinese soil,were
seen by key American decision-makers as part of this cultural onslaught.
Said Charles Denby, then American minister to China in 1895, "Mis-
sionaries are the pioneers of trade and commerce... Civilization, learn-
ing, and instruction breed new wants which commerce supplies.... The
missionary, inspired by holy zeal, goes everywhere, and by decrees
foreign commerce and trade follow.""
In this fashion, the reshaping of Chinese cultural identity and civiliza-
tion in the early twentieth century was seen by some Americansas a
means to increased commercial expansion. If only the 400 million Chi-
nese would each add 1/2 inch length to their undershirtg, the argument
ran, the mills of England and cotton growers of America could be
occupied for a lifetime with profitable employment. Instead ofconquer-
ing China barbarously and elbowing Great Britain, France, and Ger-
many aside, American diplomats devised the Open Door Policya
means to allow the superior agencies of American acculturation and
'nterprise to win the Chinese Empire with McGuffey's Reader and The
Bible, rather than the military field manual. The exertion ofwarJ
empire could be avoided without sacrificing the profits of zornmeicial
enterprise. As John Hay, the American Secretary of State, once phrased
it elegantly, "the ideal policy... is to do nothing but be around when
the watermelon is cut. Not that we want any watermelon, but it is
always fashionable to be seen in smart colored circles on occasions of
great festivity.""
In a larger and more contemporary context it is not difficult tosee
parallels between the acculturation of China into American cultural-
economic mores and the dangers of blind assimilation into American
society today. If one primary reason for reforming China was to create
an appropriate market demand for the products of American industry, it
is logical to view the Americanization of Asian-American history and
Asian-American identity with caution and suspicion, not for the sake of
Asians who may freely choose to disappear into the American main-
stream but for the sake of overseas Asian nations who are entitled to


[Page 153]
136TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
their own economic independence and self-determination. Indistinguish-
able to the American eye, the Asian national and the Asian-American
remain united in a common perception, for better or for worse. The
attempt to refashion or distort the identity of either group has had tragic
consequences whether we consider the hysterical fear of China during
the McCarthy Era that led to the Cold War and Arms Race, the images
of backward and diseased China that colored the perception of Asian
immigrants to America and provoked the anti-Chinese movement in the
nineteenth century, the transference of aggression from Imperial Japan
to Japanese-Americans in World War H, or the problems of the solitary
Asian-American child whose psyche and sense of self is irreparably
warped by the internalization of an education that degrades and maligns
his cultural identity.
There needs, instead, to be a recognition of Asian-American personal-
ities in the teaching of the Asian-American experience so that there can
be some discovery of the common human dimension shared by Asians
and Americans alike. Teaching the Asian-American experience demands
some confrontation with the emotional significance of that history for
Asian-Americans themselves. This is not an easy task but the growing
literature of Asian-American expression makes accessible this buried
human dimension of historical experience. Recently translated poems
from the Ti-Chih-Mei-Kuo (Boycott of the United States), to cite one
possibility, recount the feelings of Chinese laborers when they were
blamed in the contemporary press for an epidemic in Honolulu:
I remember
When Hawaii was plagued by an epidemic
And the blame fell upon us
For spreading the disease.
With our homes burned to the ground,
We fled like clusters of frightened crabs.
There were old men and tender babes,
And other helpless beings
Being burned to death.
The tormented feelings
Of these tragedies,
Bitter to the ear,
Excruciating for the eyes,
Cannot be repeated
By paper and pen.
Such events,
Sad to say,
Are consequences of our silent indifference
To foreign oppression,
And our own
Not-so-silent disunity?'


[Page 154]
,
"There needs. .to be a recognition of Asian-American personalities in the teaching
of the Asian-American experience so that there can be some discovery of thecom-
mon human dimension shared by Asians and Americans alike."


[Page 155]
138TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Neither need the personal dimension of Asian-American history emerge
quite so dramatically. A moving opportunity for sensing the quiet side of
historical turmoil is found in Shizuye Takashima's A Child in Prison
Camp, the narrative of the Japanese internment experience in Canada,
in which the author describes her own girlish reactions on the morning
of relocation itself:
We rise early, very early, the morning we are to leave.
The city still sleeps. The fresh autumn air feels nice.
We have orders to be at the Exhibition grounds.
The train will leave from there, not from the station
where we said good-bye to father and to David.
We wait for the train in small groups scattered
alongside the track. There is no platform.
It is September 16. School has started. I think
of my school friends and wonder if I shall ever see
them again. The familiar mountains, all purple and
splendid, watch us from afar. The yellowy-orangey
sun slowly appears. We have been standing
for over an hour. The sun's warm rays reach us,
touch a child still sleeping in its
mother's arms, touch a tree, blades of grass.
All seems magical. I study the thin yellow rays
of the sun. I imagine a handsome prince will come and
carry us all away in a shining, gold carriage with
white horses. I daydream, and feel nice as long as I don't
think about leaving this city where I was born. ...
I see the black, dull colored train. It looks
quite old. Somehow I expected a shiny new one.
Yuki remarks, "I hope it moves. You never know
with the government." Mother looks, smiles,
"Never mind, as long as we get there. We aren't
going on a vacation; we are being evacuated."
Bang ... bang ... psst ... the old train gurgles,
makes funny noises. I, seated by the window,
feel the wheels move, stop, move, stop.
Finally, I hear them begin to move in an
even rhythm slowly.
I look out the dusty window.
A number of people still wait their turn.
We wave. Children run after the train.
Gradually, it picks up speed. We pass the gray
granaries, tall and thin against the blue Vancouver sky.
The far mountains, tall pines, follow us
for a long time, until finally they are gone.


[Page 156]
"We aren't going on a vacation; we are being evacuatec."
Mother sits opposite; she has her eyes closed,
her hands are on her lap. Yuki stares out the wind )w.
A woman across the aisle quietly dabs her
tears with a white cloth. No one speaks."
The greatest danger to an open society is an education that homoge-
nizes its people into limited and fixed conformity; the greatest danger to
a small minority like Asian-Americans is that they will be imprisoned in
the images created for them by mass society and that their own personal
reality will not be able to transcend the imposed psychological coloniza-
tion of society-as-a-whole. In a like fashion, Hannah Arendt has sug-
gested that intellectual freedom can exist only in the context of psychic
space, while psychic. space can be created only between distinct and
contrasting points of view. Teaching the Asian-American experience
from an Asian-American perspective is one way of attempting to ensure
these freedoms, personally and intellectually.
139


[Page 157]
140TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Suggested Teaching Strategies
by Elizabeth 0. Pearson*
Main Idea
A. Asian-Americans were victims of labor exploitation in America.
1. Although attempts at enslavement of Asians were unsuccessful in the
U.S., indentured servitude provided the means for many Asians to come
to the U.S. Ask students to compare the characteristics of slavery with
indentured servitude. Then apply those characteristics to the conditions
under which Asians and Blacks lived and worked. Ask students to con-
sider for Blacks and Asians:
a. the amount of money offered for emigrating to America.
b. the kinds of jobs offered.
c. the wages.
d. the working conditions.
e. the reasons for emigrating.
2. So that students can see the difference in conditions under which
Asians lived when they arrived in the U.S. compared to conditions for
many AsianAmericans in the 1970's, ask students to develop a data
retrieval chart. They can determine the categories they want to include
for Chinese, Japanese, Koreans and Filipinos. Some possibilities are
illustrated below.
Reasons for
Immigra
tion
Average
Income
Kind of
Work
Years of
Greatest lmmi-
gration
Area of Pop.
Concentration
Japanese
Chinese
Filipino
Korean
See page 117 for biographical sketch. Suggested Teaching Strategies by Ms. Pearson
also accompany Chapters 9, 10, II, and 12.


[Page 158]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience141
Another chart to indicate the conditions for Asian-Americans today might
include the following categories:
Average
Income
Kind of
Work
Immigration
Since 1950
Area of Pop.
Concentration
Japanese
Chinese
Filipino
Korean
An intermediate stage should be included which would focus upon the
hardships Asian-Americans encountered, including the Chinese Exclusion Act
of 1882 and the Japanese internment during World War II.
3. A study of anti-Chinese and anti-Japanese agitation, particularly in Cali.
fornia and Washington, illuminates the problem of labor exploitation.
Labor elements began pushing for more employment of whites,. eventu-
ally phasing out Chinese workers in the Puget Sound area in 1885.
Agitation continued in 1886. Other agitation against Chinese and later
Japanese occurred in California. Students can do research into the
circumstances of these events by referring to histories of Chinese and
Japanese Americans. Documentary evidence also would be useful. The
relationship between labor unrest and the large number of laundries
and restaurants run by Chinese and the sizable number of Asian farm-
ers should be determined.
Main Idea
B. The personal reality of being an Asian-American allows a focus different
from the view the mass society maintains of Asian-Americans.
1. Understanding the way Asian-Americans see themselves can be facili-
tated by studying China or Japan at the peak of immigration. Ask
students to determine what aspects of each civilization should be stud-
ied. They might choose to familiarize themselves with aspects of every.
day life, governmental structure and religion. Comparisons can be
drawn with the Chinese or Japanese way of life in the U.S., primarily
California, after the immigrants settled into their jobs. Here again,a
data retrieval chart would be useful.


[Page 159]
142TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
2.It is difficult for anyone to truly feel the experiences others have gone
through unless he has been through similar situations. However, it is
important for students to feel history as well as know it. For example,
students can study the circumstances under which Japanese were re-
moved from cities and encamped in isolation during part of World War
II. The chapter entitled "From the Orient to the Golden Gate" in From
Many Lands by Albert Eiseman provides some information on this sub-
ject. A Child in Prison Camp by Shizuye Takashima provides a personal
portrait of Japanese internment.
Ask students to consider the following questions:
a. What did adults have to do upon leaving their homes?
b. What were some occupations in which Japanese were involved?
c. How do you think they felt about having to leave?
d. How do you think they felt toward the American government?
Now set up a role-playing situation in which two Japanese families
learn about the internment and prepare to leave their homes. Ask each
family member to identify his or her age and role. Then ask the group to
role play the situation which would occur when they were informed that
they would be placed in concentration camps. Ask also how they would
feel as they left their homes.
After one group has participated in a role-playing session, ask an-
other group to participate.
At the completion of two or more role-playing sessions, discuss what
happened in each with the whole class. Focus upon the feelings of each
participant as he or she verbalizes them. Then ask for reactions from
the class.
a. Did they empathize with the characters?
b. Can they think of situations which exist today that might in some
ways be parallel to what the Japanese experienced?
3. Recent Filipino and Chinese immigrants encounter a variety of cultural
differences upon their arrival in the United States. So that students may
become more aware of the problems Asian immigrants experience,
have them role play a recent Filipino immigrant on his first day of
classes in an American city high school. Find a speaker who can report
to the class the cultural traditions and ways of life from which Asian
immigrants, particularly Chinese and Filipino, are severed in their move
to the United States. Ask students to find out the rate of employment for
Filipinos and Chinese in cities such as San Francisco, Los Angeles and
Seattle which have sizable groups of Asian immigrants. Then have them
role play a situation in which a Chinese immigrant with specific skills is
interviewed by a counselor for an employment agency.


[Page 160]
.1?
irvglt$1, ".1,141,Vail*abiat,Sk la.U4Valliat10.14A.Gataga0181,1Z02,411anate."104. ,..44414a.aomo, usuxoact laoatal.a.ahrvagN zaa.q..,


[Page 161]
144TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Main Idea
C. The power of pressure groups in the U.S. has been an effective means of
discriminating against Asian-Americans.
1. Dennis Kearney
Chinese Exclusion Act 1882
White gold miners in California
Pacific Coast AntiCoolie Association
1879 California State Constitution
Asiatic Exclusion League 1905
Anti-Japanese Laundry League
California newspapers, World War II
The above persons and groups acted in some way to pressure for
exclusion of Japanese and Chinese from the U.S. After students deter-
mine the purpose and methods of these persons and groups, all operat-
ing in California between 1860 and 1945, have them try to generalize
about the methods of these persons and groups and their goals to
determine just why they were so effective in limiting the activities of
Asian-Americans.
2. For the individual citizen's recollection of pressure groups, ask students
to interview adults who remember World War II. Questions should focus
upon remembered statements by public officials and groups about the
necessity, or lack of, for internment of the Japanese after Pearl Harbor.
Questions also could probe an individual's recollection of others' views
of Japanese-Americans and the necessity for internment.
3. In the decade of the sixties, attempts to cease discrimination against
minorities resulted in a variety of pressure groups organized for that
purpose. To develop student awareness of these groups, ask students
to find out what groups function as spokesmen for Asian-Americans,
both in their state and nationally. The goals, methods of attaining them,
and kinds of membership should be discussed for each group. Inviting
a speaker from each group aloog with examining the group's literature
are useful ways of informing students. Some students may choose to
join the organization or estelAish a chapter in their town.


[Page 162]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience145
FOOTNOTES
' Thomas E. La Fargue, China's First Hundred (Pullman, Washington: State College of
Washington, 1942), p. 42. Also quoted in Bill Lann Lee, "Yung Wing and the Americani-
zation of China," Amerasia Journal, Volume I, No. 1, March 1971. p. 30.
' Voices of the Americans (San Francisco: Leswing Publications, 1971), p. 76.
' Frank Capellutti and Ruth Grossman, The Human Adventure (New York: Field
Educational Publications, 1971), p. 463.
' The Social Sciences, Concepts and Values (Level Five, Purple) (New York: Harcourt
Brace and Jovanovich, 1970), p. 333 (Teacher's Manual Edition).
' William Hollister testifying before the Joint Special Committee to Investigate Chinese
Immigration, November 16, 1876, p. 777. The hearings of this committee were reproduced
in a massive thousand-page volume, copies of which are available in select libraries such as
those of Yale University and the University of California at Los Angeles and Berkeley.
' See Gunther Barth, Bitter Strength: A History of the Chinese in the United States,
1850-1870(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1964), p. 139.
' Philip A. Roach, "Minority Report of the Select Committeeon Senate Bill No. 63, 'an
act to enforce contracts and obligations to perform work and labor'," California Senate
Journal, 3rd session, 1852, appendix pp. 669-674, in Barth. p. 140.
' Mention of this attempt is found in the letter from George Wilkes, President of the
Lower California Company, to J. Ross Browne, then American minister to China, in
communications dated July 24, 1868 between Browne and Secretary of State William
Seward in U. S. Diplomatic Correspondence, 1868, part I, pp. 528-529. The letter between
Browne and Wilkes itself is dated June 7, 1868.
'Franklin St. Mary's Planters Journal quoted in New Orleans Commercial Bulletin,
January 16, 1867, in Barth, p. 187, and the Lexington Observer and Reporter, July 12,
1869, in Barth, p. 187.
"For a concise history of Korean labor in America see Linda Shin, "Koreans in
America, 1903-1945" in Amerasia Journal, Volume 1, No. 3, November 1971, pp. 32-39.
"A general discussion of Filipino immigration to the United States can be found in
"Filipino Immigration: the Creation of a New Social Problem" in Roots: An Asian
American Reader (Los Angeles: UCLA Asian American Studies Center, 1971), pp. 188-
201.
"California Legislature, "Report of the Joint Select Committee Relative to the Chinese
Population of the State of California" (Sacramento: 1862), p. 7 in Thomas Chinn, H. Mark
Lai, and Philip P. Choy (editors). A History of the Chinese in California, A Syllabus (San
Francisco: Lawton and Kennedy by the Chinese Historical Society of America, 1969),p.
32.
"Stanford M. Lyman, "The Significance of Asians in American Society" in The Asian
in the West (Reno: University of Nevada, 1970), pp. 3-8.
" Mary Ellen Leary, "San Francisco's Chinatown" in Atlantic Monthly, Volume 225,
March 1970, pp. 32-42.
"Action for Boston Community Development, Inc., Planning and Evaluation Depart-
ment, "The Chinese in Boston," pp. ii-iii. Monograph reproduced for limited use, appar-
ently by the authors themselves.
"Stuart Cattell. Health, Welfare, and Social Organization in Chinatown, New York
City, a report prepared for Chinatown Public Health Nursing Demonstration Department
of Public Affairs (New York: Community Service Society, 1962), p. 59. Limited reproduc-
tion.
"Frank Soule, John H. Gihon, and James Nisbet, The Annals of San Francisco, 1855.
(Palo Alto: Lewis Osborne, reprinted 1966), pp. 411-412.
"Dr. H. H. Tolland before the Special Committee to Investigate Chinese Immigration
1877-1878 in "Chinatown Declared a Nuisance," by The Committee (of the Working-
man's Party), pp. 4-5. Pamphlet on file in the Special Collections on Chinese Immigration
in the UCLA Research Library.


[Page 163]
146TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
" Robert McClellan, The Heathen Chinee, A Study of American Attitudes Towards
China, 1890-1905 (Ohio State University Press, 1971), p. 253.
" Henry Luce to Prof. Reed, May 10, 1904, Yale-in-China Archives, Henry Luce file,
reprinted from Progressivism and the Open Door, America and China, 1905-1921 by Jerry
Israel (by permission of the University of Pittsburgh Press, 1971) by the University of
Pittsburgh Press.
2' Israel, p. xi.
n China Dispatches, 98, No. 2172, Denby to Gresham, March 22, 1895; 100, No. 2341,
Denby to Olney, November 14, 1895 in Thomas McCormick, China Market, America's
Quest for Informal Empire, 1893-1901 (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1967), p. 66.
"John Hay to Henry Adams, July 8, 1900, Hay Papers, Library of Congress, in Marilyn
B. Young, The Rhetoric of Empire, American China Policy, 1895-1901 (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1968), p. 102.
" Ti-Chih-Mei-Kuo (Boycott of the United States) quoted in "Chinese in the United
States: A View From Peking," translated by Odonc Wou in Bridge Magazine, Volume I,
No. 4, March/April 1972, p. 23. Reprinted with permission.
" Shizuye Takashima, A Child in Prison Camp (Plattsburgh, N.Y.: Tundra Books,
1971), no pagination, section entitled "An End to Waiting." Reprinted with permission of
the publisher.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Books Dealing with the Asian-American Experience from a Multi - Ethnic Perspective:
Jacobs, Paul and Saul Landau with Eve Pell, To Serve the Devil, Volume 2, Colonials and
Sojourners (New York: Random House, Vintage Books, 1971). A collection of primary
source materials, carefully edited to present a documentary history of minorities in
America.
Kitano, Harry and Roger Daniels, American Racism (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1970). An
interesting sociological and historical introduction to anti-Asian racism.
Lyman, Stanford, The Asian in the West (Reno: Desert Research Institute of the Univer-
sity of Nevada, 1970). A series of meticulously researched essays on Japanese and
Chinese in the Western United States, concentrating on the nineteenth century, but
including some valuable research on contemporary developments in Asian communities.
Odo, Franklin, Amy Tachiki, and Eddie Wong, Roots: An Asian American Reader (Los
Angeles: UCLA Asian American Studies Center, 1971). A documentary collection of
recent works on Asian Americans that rcflects the tensions and aspirations of emerging
generations. Roots' diversity in style, content, and regional representation make it as
broadly representative as any current publication in the field.
Books on the Chinese-American Experience:
Barth, Gunther, Bitter Strength: A History of the Chinese in the United States, 1850-1870
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1964). The first comprehensive recent study of
early Chinese immigrant history in the United States. Barth's book abounds in construc-
tive details about the 1850-1870 period but has a dangerous tendency to generalize
without substantiation about the acculturation of Chinese into California life.
Isaacs, Harold, Scratches on Our Minds (also published as Images of Asia) (New York:
John Day, 1958). An analysis of the shifting image of China and the Chinese throughout
American history.


[Page 164]
Teaching the Asian-American Experience147
Miller, StuartC., The Unwelcomed Immigrant: The American Image of the Chinese,
1785-1882(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1969). A path-
breaking study of the American image of the Chinese prior to the Chinese Exclusion Act
of 1882. By analyzing the writings and reports of American traders, diplomats, and
missionaries, and their transference into the contemporary nineteenth-century media,
Miller argues that the causes of Chinese exclusion were national as wellas regional.
Saxton, Alexander,The Indispensable Enemy: Labor and the Anti-Chinese Movement in
California(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971). A compel-
lingly reasoned and marvelously thorough study of the roots of anti-Chinese agitation
in California's developing labor movement and Democratic Party. An advanced work
for the reader who wishes to pinpoint the details of the origins of the anti-Chinese
movement.
Books on the Japanese- American Experience:
Bosworth, Alan,America's Concentration Camps(New York: W. W. Norton. 1967). A
popular treatment of Japanese-American relocation in World War II.
ten Broek, Jacobus, Edward N. Barnhart, and Floyd Matson,Prejudice, War, and the
Constitution(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1954). An erudite and exhaus-
tively researched study of Japanese - American relocation.
Daniels, Roger, The Politicsof Prejudice(Gloucester, Massachusetts: Peter Smith, 1966).
A concise and highly readable account of the development of anti-Japanese sentiment in
California prior to World War II.
Ichihashi, Yamato,Japanese in the United States(New York: Arno Press and theNew
York Times,1969, originally published in 1932). The most rigorous and detailed treat-
ment of Japanese immigration to America.
Books on the Filipino-American Experience:
Bulosan, Carlos,America Is in theHeart (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World. 1943).
One immigrant's personal account of his life in the United States.
Lasker, Bruno,Filipino Immigration to the Continental United States and Hawaii(Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1931). The seminal scholarly workonFilipinos in the
United States.


[Page 165]
James A. Banks
JAMES A. BANKS is Associate Professor of Education at the Univer-
sity of Washington, Seattle. He received his bachelor's degree from
Chicago State University, and the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Michi-
gan State University. Professor Banks taught in the public schools of
Joliet, Illinois, and at the Francis W. Parker School in Chicago. He is a
member of the National Advisory Board, ERIC Clearinghouse for Edu-
cation and Social Science, the Social Science Education Consortium
Publications Task Force, and the United States Office of Education
Leadership Training Institute on Teacher Education. His articles have
appeared in such journals as Social Education, The Instructor, School
Review, and Educational Leadership. He has served as guest editor ofa
special issue of the Phi Delta Kappan which focused on ethnic educa-
tion.
Professor Banks is the author of March Toward Freedom: A History
of Black Americans, Teaching the Black Experience: Methods and
Materials, Teaching Strategies for the ,Social Studies: Inquiry, Valuing
and Decision-Making, and the forthcoming Teaching Strategies for
Ethnic Studies. He coedited and contributed to Teaching Social Studies:
Strategies of Teaching to Culturally Different Children, Teaching the
Language Arts to Culturally Different Children, and Black Self-Con-
cept: Implications for Education and Social Science. He contributed to
the 1972 NCSS Yearbook, the 1974 ASCD Yearbook, and to the books
Racial Crisis in American Education, Black Image: Education Copes
with Color, and Teaching Social Studies in the Urban Classroom.
148


[Page 166]
JAMES A. BANKS
7
Teaching Black Studies
for Sock 1.1 Change
With the emergence of the Black revolt of the sixties, Black people
began to shape and perpetuate a new identity. "Black Power" and
"Black Is Beautiful" were rallying cries of this identity search. Blacks
rejected many of the components of the dominant white culture, and
searched for elemem., out of which a new identity could be formed. Such
elements include intensified racial pride and cohesiveness,a search for
power, and an attempt to identify cultural roots in Africa. African
dashikis, tikis, Afro hair styles, and Swahilian phrases emergedas new
cultural components.
Written history is an important part of a people's heritage. As the
Black revolt gained momentum, Blacks demanded that history bere-
written so that the role played by them in shaping America's destiny
would be more favorably and realistically portrayed. Organized interest
groups pressured school districts to ban lily-white history books from
the schools. When the pressure on school districts mounted, theyen-
couraged publishers to include more Blacks in schoolbooks.
In response to Black demands for Black history and Black studies,
educational institutions at all levels have madesome attempts to insti-
tute Black studies programs. Publishers, seeking quick profits, have
responded to the Black history movement by producinga flood of
Parts of this chapter are based upon the author's "Teaching Black History witha Focus
on Decision-Making,"Social Education,Vol. 35, November, 1971, pp. 740-745, 820-21. A
more extended discussion of the ideas contained in this chapter are in the author's text,
Teaching Strategies for the Social Studies(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, 1973).
149


[Page 168]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change151
textbooks, tradebooks, and multi-media "kits," many of dubious value.
Most of the "integrated" materials now on the market are little more
than old wine in new bottles, and contain white characters painted
brown, and the success stories of "safe" Blacks such as Crispus Attucks
and Booker T. Washington. The problems which powerless ethnic
groups experience in America are de-emphasized or ignored)
Despite the recent attempts to implement Black history programs, few,
of them are sound because the goals of Black studies remain confused,
ambiguous, and conflicting. Many Black studies programs have been
structured without careful planning and clear rationales. Divergent goals
for Black history programs are often voiced by experts of many different
persuasions and ideologies. Larry Cuban, a leader in ethnic education,
argues that "the only legitimate goals for ethnic content [in the public
schools]... are tooffer a balanced view of the American past and
present ..."_ (emphasis added). Nathan Hare, another innovator in
ethnic studies, believes that Black history should be taught from a Black
perspective and emphasize the struggles and aspirations of Black peo-
ple.'
Many young Black activists feel that the main goal of Black history
should be to equip Black students with an ideology which is imperative
for their liberation. Some Blacks who belong to the over-thirty genera-
tion, such as Martin Kilson and Bayard Rustin, think that education
which is designed to develop a commitment to a fixed ideology is
antithetical to sound scholarship and has no place in public institutions.
Writes Kilson, "... I don't believe itis the proper or most useful
function of a [school] to train ideological or political organizers of
whatever persuasion. A [school's] primary function is to impart skills,
techniques, and special habits of learning to its students. The student
must be free to decide himself on the ,ideological application of his
training."' The disagreement over the pioper goals for Black studies
reflects the widespread racial tension and polarization within American
society.
Classroom teachers are puzzled about strategies to use in teaching
Black history and have serious questions about who can teach Black
studies because of the disagreement over goals among curriculum ex-
perts and social scientists. Effective teaching strategies and sound crite-
ria for judging materials cannot be formulated until goals are identified
and explicitly stated. In the past, most social studies teachers empha-
sized the mastery of factual information, and tried to develop a blind
commitment to "democracy" as practiced in the United States. Unless a
sound rationale for Black studies programs can be stated and new
approaches to the teaching of Black history implemented, students will
get just as sick and tired of Black history as they have become with


[Page 169]
152TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
white chauvinistic schoolbook history. Some students already feel that
Black history has been "oversold." Many teachers who teach Black
history use new materials but traditional strategies because multi-ethnic
materials, although necessary for sound social studies programs, do not
in themselves solve the classroom teacher's pedagogical problems.
Without both new goals and novel strategies, Black history will be-
come just another fleeting fad. Isolated facts about Crispus Attucks
don't stimulate the intellect any more than isolated facts about Abraham
Lincoln. In this chapter, the author offers a rationale for Black studies
programs for the reader's consideration, attempts to resolve the ques-
tion, "Black history for what?", and illustrates how Black historycan be
taught as an integral part of a modern social studies curriculum which is
spiral, conceptual, and interdisciplinary, and which emphasizes decision-
making and social action skills.
The Purpose of Black History Instruction
The goal of Black history should be to help students develop the
ability to make reflective decisions so that they can resolve personal
problems and, through social action, influence public policy and develop
a sense of political efficacy. To help liberate Black Americans from
physical and psychological captivity, we must help them to attain effec-
tive decision-making and social action skills which can be used to solve
personal problems and to influence the making of public policy. Thus,
the ultimate goal of social studies for Black students should be to make
them effective political activists. While social action skills are needed by
all students, they are especially needed by Black students because most
of them are still physically and psychologically victimized by institu-
tional racism. When an individual develops the ability to make reflective
decisions, he can act effectively to free himself from oppression and
colonialism. Poverty, political powerlessness, low self-esteem, consumer
exploitation, institutional racism, and political alienation are the kinds
of problems which the social studies must help Black youths to resolve
through effective political action.
We must radicalize Black and other colonialized students so that they
will continually challenge the position of those in power. We should also
train them so that they will develop the skills and knowledge to obtain
power and use it to build institutions which they will control. Until
oppressed people obtain power and independent institutions, they will
be victims of the whims of the ruling-elite because policy made by those
in power is made primarily to enhance, legitiMize and to reinforce their
power. I will illustrate in this chapter how Black history, as an integral
part of an inquiry-oriented social studies curriculum, can help students
...


[Page 170]
Teaching Black Siucilcs for Social Change153
to develop skills in decision-making and social action. First, however, I
will state the assumptions of my theory of social education.
Assumptions
My beliefs about the proper goal of the social studies are based on the
assumption that man will always face personal and social problems, and
that all citizens should participate in the making of public policy in an
open society. The focus for the social studies which I recommend is not
only grounded in a cultural pluralistic ideology, but One of its basic
assumptions is that maximum participation of all citizens in the making
of public policy is essential for the creation and perpetuation of a society
in which each ethnic minority group can maintain its unique cultural
identity, and yet fully participate in all social and political institutions.
The theory advocates cultural diversity rather than assimilation. It re-
jects the notion that elitists, ruling and powerful groups or academic
specialists should determine the goals of social and political institutions.
The proper role of the academic specialist is to facilitate the realization
of the goals and values shaped by all groups within a society.
I am also assuming that individuals are not born with the ability to
make reflective decisions, but that decision-making consists of a set of
skills which can be identified and systematically taught. Further, I am
assuming that man can both identify and clarify his values, and that he
can be trained to reflect upon problems before acting on theta.
I have suggested that students should not only become decision-mak-
ers, but that they should develop the ability to make reflective decisions.
An important question which I have a responsibility to answer is "How
do I distinguish between a reflective and a non-reflective decision?" or
"What criteria do I use to evaluate the effectiveness of a decision?" In
this chapter, I am going to delineate a process with definite steps and
attributes which a decision-maker must satisfy before I am willing to call
his decisions and actions reflective. It is extremely important for the
reader to realize that I am primarily concerned with a process of deci-
sion-making, and not with specific products of decisions.
The careful reader may raise several legitimate questions about my
position and wonder about the consequences for a society in which
individuals are free to make uncoerced decisions. Such individuals may,
for example, violate norms which are essential for the survival of his
group. In principle, a social actor who reached a decision using the
Social actorrefers to an individual who makes a deliberate effort to influence his social
environment and persons within it, including societal laws, public policy, norms, values
and the distribution of wealth. The activities in which he participates aresocial action.
Social action may be effective or ineffective.


[Page 171]
154TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
process which I will spell out below may decide to murder all of his
perceived enemies. This possibility forces me to make explicit other
assumptions on which my theory of social studies education is based. I
am assuming that social actors who make decisions using the process
which I advocate will act in ways that will perpetuate the cultural
identity and integrity of their group, and the creation of a humane and
just society. I believe that most persons who habituallyhumane
values do so primarily because they are the victims of a society which
perpetuates myths about the inferiority and superiority of different
groups, have confused values, and act before rationally reflecting upon
the possible consequences of their actions. Most such actions, I believe,
are impetuous, impulsive and non-reflective.
While my position assumes that reflective decision-makers will act in
ways consistent with humane values, it is not a theory which does not
advocate social change. It also assumes that if the social actors withina
society use the process which I will describe to reach decisions, societal
goals, values and mores will be changed by intelligent social action when
they no longer contribute to the satisfaction of human needs and aspira-
tions, or when they no longer meet the current needs of society. When
goals and values become obsolete and dysfunctional, the public, through
massive and effective social action, will construct new goals and values
which are more consistent with current needs,purposes, and beliefs.
Thus, while the theoryis not necessarily a revolutionary one, itopens up
the possibility for revolution in values and in social and poFtical institu-
tions.
The social studies curriculum which I advocate could possibly prevent
chaos and destructive instability within our society, while at the same
time providing means and methods whereby oppressed groups and new
generations can shape their own destinies, use those aspects of tradi-
tional society which are consistent with their needs, and createnew,
legitimate life-styles and values when it is necessary to do so. What is
legitimate, normative and valued is subject to reconstruction in each
new generation. Each generation, however, can use those aspects of the
past which are functional for current needs and purposes. Thus our
theory advocates both stability and change within a society.
Essential Components of Decision-Making
Knowledge is one essential component of the decision-making pro-
cess. There are many kinds of knowledge and ways of attaining it. To
make a reflective decision, the decision-maker mustuse the scientific
method to attain knowledge. The knowledge on which reflective deci-
sions are made must also be powerful and widely applicableso that it


[Page 172]
,41,141
rt.'21
. tr,r.,rrk`5,1%;,.:{ inrrrrIrr071-4411146,1,1A40,1, 641,t6.


[Page 173]
156 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
will enable the decision-maker to make the most accurate predictions
possible. There are several categories of knowledge and they vary in
their predictive capacity and in their ability to help us to organize our
observations, and thus to make decisions.
Factual knowledge, which consists of specific empirical statements
about limited phenomena, is the lowest level of knowledge, and has the
least predictive capacity. Concepts are words or phrases which enable us
to categorize or classify a large class of observations, and thus to reduce
the complexity of our social environment. Because of their structure and
function, concepts in and of themselves do not possess predictive value.
However, generalizations, which state the relationship between concepts
or variables, enable us to predict behavior; the predictive capacity of
generalizations varies directly with their degree of applicability and
amount of empirical support. Generalizations which describe a large
class of behavior and which have been widely verified are the most
useful for making predictions and thus decisions. Theory is the highest
form of knowledge, and is the most useful for making predictions. A
theory consists of a deductive system of logically interrelated generaliza-
tions. Although no grand or all-inclusive theories exist in the social
sciences as in the physical sciences, numerous partial or middle range
social science theories exist, such as Durkheim's theory of suicide and
Allport's theory of prejudice.
To make reflective decisions, the student must be able to use the
scientific method to derive higher level generalizations and theories,
since these forms of knowledge will enable him to make the most
accurate predictions. The most predictive generalizations and theories
are those which are related to the key or organizing concepts in the
social sciences. The identification of key concepts within the social
sciences enables the decision-maker to use the most powerful generaliza-
tions which constitute the behavioral sciences, and which can make the
greatest contribution to the resolution of personal and social problems,
and facilitate the influencing of public policy.
Students must not only master higher levels of knowledge in order to
make reflective decisions, they must also learn to view human behavior
from the perspectives of all of the social and behavioral sciences. A
social studies curriculum which focuses on decision-making and the
Black experience must be interdisciplinary; it should incorporate key (or
The basic steps of this method include problem formulation, formulation of hy-
potheses, definition of terms (conceptualization), data collection, evaluation and analysis
of data, testing hypotheses: deriving generalizations and theories, and beginning inquiry
anew. Social inquiry is cyclic rather than linear and fixed. Generalizations and theories in
social science are continually tested and are never regarded as absolute. For a useful
reference, see Abraham Kaplan, The Conduct of Inquiry (San Francisco: Chandler Pub-
lishing Company, 1964).


[Page 174]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change157
organizing) concepts from all of the social sciences. Knowledge from
any one discipline is insufficient to help us make decisions on complex
issues such as poverty, institutionalized racism and oppression. To take
effective social action on a social issue such as poverty, students must
view it from the perspectives of geography, history, sociology, econom-
ics, political science, psychology, and anthropology. (See Figure 1.)
FIGURE 1
UNDERSTANDING A SOCIAL ISSUE
WITH SOCIAL SCIENCE CONCEPTS AND THEORIES
CULTURE (ANTHROPOLOGY)
POWER (POLITICAL SCIENCE)
FRUSTRATION(PSYCHOLOGY).."4"
deSTATUS (SOCIOLOGY)
.d....CHANGE (HISTORY)
' URBAN SPATIAL PATTERN
(GEOGRAPHY)
SCARCITY (ECONOMICS)
This figure illustrates how a social issue such as poverty can be sufficiently
understood and therefore reflectively acted upon only after the social actor has
viewed it with the concepts and theories from a number of social science
disciplines. Any one discipline gives only a partial understanding of a social
problem or issue. Thus, the social studies programs must be interdisciplinary.
While higher-level, interdisciplinary knowledge is necessary to make
sound decisions, it is not sufficient. Students must also be able to iden-
tify, clarify, and analyze their values. Value inquiry and clarification are
essential components of a sound social studies curriculum which incor-
porates the Black experience. Students should also be taught how to
relate the concepts and generalizations which they derive to their values,
and thus to make decisions. Decision-making consists essentially of
affirming a course of action after synthesizing knowledge and clarified
values. Students should also be provided opportunities whereby they can
act on some of the decisions which they make. It would be neither
possible nor desirable for children to act on all of the decisions which
they make in social studies classes. However, "... under no circum-
stances should the school, deliberately or by default, continue to main-
tain the barriers between itself and the other elements of society."3
Social action and participation activities are necessary components of a
conceptually-oriented, decision-making social studies curriculum which
incorporates the Black experience.


[Page 175]
158TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
The Structure of History
We must identify the key concepts within the disciplines and their
related generalizations to plan a curriculum which focuses on decision-
making and incorporates the Black experience. Identifying the key con-
cepts within history poses special problems. While the behavioral sci-
ences use unique conceptual frameworks to view human behavior, histo-
ry's uniqueness stems from the fact that it views behavior which has
taken place in the past, is interested in the totality of man's past, and
uses a modified mode of scientific inquiry. While the sociologist and the
political scientist are primarily interested in socialization and power
respectively, the historian may be and sometimes is interested in how
each of these concepts is exemplified in man's past behavior. History,
then, is an interdisciplinary field since historians, in principle, are inter-
ested in all aspects of man's past. It is difficult to speak about unique
historical concepts. Every discipline makes use of the historical perspec-
tive, and has historical components. When a sociologist studies norms
and sanctions during the period of slavery, and the economist describes
how the slaves produced goods and services, they are both studying
history.
While history, in principle; is concerned with the totality of man's
past, in practice history is largely political because most of the concepts
which it uses, such as revolution, government, war, and nationalism,
belong to political science. History as it is usually written focuses on
great political events and leaders, and largely ignores the experiences of
the common man, non-Western man, ethnic groups, and key concepts
from most of the other social sciences, except geography. However, since
history, in principle, is concerned with the totality of man's past, it is
potentially the most interdisciplinary of all of the social disciplines and
for that reason can serve as an excellent framework for incorporating the
Black experience into the curriculum from an interdisciplinary perspec-
tive, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Although historians have largely ignored concepts from most of the
behavioral sciences, and the struggles and aspirations of the common
and Third World man, a modern program in historical studies can and
should incorporate these knowledge components. In recent years, histo-
rians have become acutely aware of how limited and parochial written
history is, and have taken steps, but still inadequate ones, to include
both the contributions and struggles of ethnic groups in their accounts
and to use more concepts from the behavioral sciences. Stanley M.
Elkins, in his classic study of slavery, uses a number of psychological
concepts and theories to explain the behavior of the slave and master.'


[Page 176]
I'
'.,
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change159
FIGURE 2
STUDYING THE BLACK EXPERIENCE FROM AN INTERDISCIPLINARY PERSPECTIVE
WITHIN A HISTORICAL FRAMEWORK
DisciplineAnalytical ConceptsKey Questions
SociologyValues, NormsWhat unique values and
norms have emerged within
the Black community?
Political Science
.
PowerWhat power relationships
have existed within the
Black community?
AnthropologyAcculturationWhat kind of culture
exchange has taken place
between Blacks and whites
in the United States?
PsychologySelf-ConceptHow has the Black
experience affected the
Black man's feelings and
perceptions of himself?
GeographyRegionWhere have Blacks usually
lived within our cities
and why?
EconomicsGoods. Services,
Production
What goods and services
have been produced in the
Black community? Why?
History
.
ChangeHow has the Black commu-
nity changed in recent
years?
The trend toward more highly interdisciplinary history willundoubtedly
continue as historians become more familiar with behavioral science
concepts.
Incorporating the Black Experience into a
Conceptual Curriculum
To illustrate how a program in historical studies can he bothinterdis-
ciplinary and incorporate the experiences of Black Americans. wehave
identified seven key concepts from the various disciplines which can be


[Page 177]
160 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
taught within a historical framework, related organizing generalizations,
and sub-generalizations related to Black History. While the sub-general-
izations in our examples relate exclusively to the Black experience, a
sound social studies program should include content samples that are
related to man's total past, including the experiences of Native Ameri-
cans, Puerto Rican Americans, Chicanos, and Asian-Americans.
Key Concept: CONFLICT (History)
Organizing Generalization:Throughout history, conflict has developed
between various racial and ethnic groups.
Sub-Generalizations:
I. Violence and conflict occurred on the slave ships.
2. Several Black leaders led slave revolts during slavery in which Blacks
and whites were killed.
3. When Blacks began their migration to Northern cities near the turn
of the century, violent racial confrontations occurred in major urban
areas.
4. During the Black Revolt of the 1960's, racial rebellions took place in
a number of United States cities which resulted in the murder of
many Black citizens.
Key Concept: CULTURE (Anthropology)
Organizing Generalization:Many different racial and ethnic groups
have contributed to and enriched American culture.
Sub-Generalizations:
I. Skilled Black slaves helped to construct and decorate the Southern
mansions.
2. The slave songs made a significant impact on American music.
3. The blues and jazz forms of music created by Black Americans
constitute America's most unique musical heritage.
4. The literature written by Black Americans during the Harlem Renais-
sance contributed greatly to American culture.
5. Black American art expresses the poignant experiences of Black
people in highly creative ways.
Key Concept: RACISM (Sociology)
Organizing Generalization:All non-white groups have been the victims
of racism and discrimination in America.


[Page 178]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change161
Sub-Generalizations:
1. During slavery Blacks were not permitted to learn to read, to form
groups without a white being present. or to testify in court against a
white person.
2. The "Black Codes" that were established after the Emancipation
Proclamation was issued created, in many ways, a new kind of
"slavery" in the South.
3. For many years, legal segregation in the South forced Blacks to
attend inferior schools, denied them the ballot, and sanctioned segre-
gation in public accommodation and transportation facilities.
4. Blacks still experience discrimination in all phases of American life,
including education, the administration of justice, and employment.
Key Concept: CAPITALISM (Economics)
Organizing Generalization:In a capitalistic society, powerless groups
are unable to compete equally for jobs and rewards.
Sub-Generalizations:
1. During slavery, Blacks were forced to work without wages so that
whites could make large profits from Southern crops.
2. After the Emancipation Proclamation was issued, "freed" Blacks
were forced to work in a sharecropping system which cheated and
exploited them.
3. When Blacks migrated to Northern and Western cities, they were the
last hired and the first fired.
4. Today, many Blacks are unable to find steady and meaningful em-
ployment because they control few production industries.
Key Concept: POWER (Political Science)
Organizing Generalization:Individuals are more likely to influence
public policy and to bring about social change when working in groups
than when working alone.
Sub-Generalizations:
1. During slavery Blacks, by working cooperatively, were able to help
many slaves escape with a system known as the "Underground Rail-
road."
2. By gaining group support, civilrioy,hts organizations such as the
NAACP and CORE were able to end lynchings, and to reduce legal
discrimination in such areas as employment, education and transpor-
tation.


[Page 179]
162TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
3. The Black Revolt of the 1960's was able to reduce legal discrimina-
tion in such areas as employment, law, education and transportation.
4. The Nation of Islam has been able to provide many Blacks educa-
tional and job opportunities.
Key Concept: SELF-CONCEPT (Psychology)
Organizing Generalization:Self-Concept highly influences an individu-
al's perceptions of the world and affects his behavior.
Sub-Generalizations:
1. The slave masters were able to convince many Blacks that theywere
less than human; the success of the slave masters in this task helped
to reduce Black resistance to slavery.
2. Many slaves never accepted the views of themselves whichwere
perpetuated by the slave masters and ran away or participated in
slave revolts.
3. The movement led by Marcus Garvey in the 1920's enabledmany
Blacks to think more highly of their race and to developgroup pride.
4. The Black Revolt of the 1960's caused many Blacks to feelmore
positively toward their race and to protest vigorously for their rights.
Key Concept: REGION (Geography)
Organizing Generalization:Every region is unique in its own way.
Sub-Generalizations:
1. The central area of the city where most Blacks live is usually charac-
terized by substandard housing, higher prices, and public officials
who are largely unaccountable to their constituents.
2. Prices for goods and services are usually higher in the centralarea of
the city where most live than in outlying areas.
3. Police protection, city services, and public schoolsare usually inferior
in the areas of a city where Black populations are concentrated.
4. Culture elements which are unique to the Black communitycan
usually be found within a designated area of a city; often these
culture elements do not diffuse outward to other metropolitanre-
,ions.
Once a teacher or curriculum committee has identified the keycon-
cepts and generalizations which can serve as a framework for a social
studies curriculum or unit, and stated sub-generalizations that relateto
the Black experience, he ;or the committee) can then identify the materi-
als and teaching strategies which are necessary to help the students


[Page 180]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change163
derive the concepts and their related generalizations. The seven key
concepts and generalizations stated above can be taught at every level
within a spiral conceptual curriculum and developed at increasing levels
of complexity with different content samples. At each level materials
related to the Black experience, as well as content related to other
groups, should be used to teach the key concepts and generalizatior..
Figure 3 illustrates how the seven key concepts can be spiralled within a
FIGURE 3
This diagram illustrates how information related to tee Black experience can be
organized around key concepts and taught at successive levels at an increasing
degree of complexity.
VIII
VII
VI
V
IV
III
LEVELS


[Page 181]
164TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
conceptual curriculum at eight different levels. Ideally, however, a con-
ceptual curriculum should constitute the social studies program from
kindergarten to grade 12:
To assure that every sub-generalization identified in the initial stages
of planning is adequately developed within a unit, the teacher can divide
a sheet of paper in half and list the concepts and sub-generalizations on
one side of it and the strategies and materials needed to teach the ideas
on the other half, as illustrated in Figures 4 and 5.
FIGURE 4
KEY IDEAS AND TEACHING STRATEGIES
KeyIdeasActivities
RACISM
Key Generalization:
All
non-white groups have been
he victims of institutionalized
racism in America.
Sub-Generalization:
Blacks have experienced discrimi-
nation in all phases of American
life, including education, the ad-
ministration of justice, and em-
ployment.
1. Reading selections fromSouth
Town,NorthTown,and
Whose Town?by Lorenz Gra-
ham.
2. Discussing the discrimination
which the Williams family ex-
periencedinthisstory and
how they coped with it.
3. Discussing the discrimination
which David Williams experi-
enced in school and how he
reacted to it.
4. Viewing a filmstrip on Black
slavery and listing waysin
which it was a form of discrim-
ination.
5. Finding copies of such docu-
ments as theSlave Codesand
theGrandfather Clauseand
role-playing how they affected
the lives of Blacks.
6. Compiling statistics on the
number of Blacks 'who were
lynched during the early years
of the 1900's.
7. Reading and discussingac-
counts of thediscriminatibn
which Blacks experiencein
employment, education, and in
the administration of justice
today.


[Page 182]
A
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change
FIGURE 5
KEYIDEAS AND TEACHING STRATEGIES
165
Key IdeasActivities
CULTURE
Key Generalization:
Many different racial and ethnic
groups have contributed to and
enriched American culture.
Sub-Generalization:
The literature written by Black
Americans.ringtheHarlem
Renaissance contributed greatly
to American culture.
1. Reading "Montage of a Dream
Deferred"byLangston
Hughes.
2. Discussing what theauthor
means by "deferred dream."
3. Discussing the dreams of
Black people which have been
deferred and why.
4. Reading "If We Must Die" by
Claude McKay.
5. Discussing the racial rebellions
which took place near the turn
of the century and the ways in
which the two poems are social
commentaries aboutracial
conflict.
b. Reading "Incident" by Coun-
tee Cullen.
7. Discussing how the child felt
when he first came to Balti-
more and why.
8. Discussing why and how his
feelings changed.
9. Discussing ways in which the
Harlem Renaissance poets ex-
pressedtheirfeelings, emo-
tions, and aspirations in their
writings, and how they con-
tributed to American literature
and culture.
Teaching the Historical Method (History as Process)
Because the historian's method is much more unique than his substan-
tive concepts and generalizations, it is important to teach students the
historical method (process), as well as concepts related to historical
conclusions (products). History is a process as well as a body of knowl-
edge. A historian's view of the past is influenced by the availability of
evidence, his personal biases, purposes for writing, and the society and


[Page 183]
166TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
times in which he lives and writes. Although history reflects the biases of
the writer, itis often taught in school as a body of truth not to be
questioned, criticized, or modified. Such a parochial approach to the
teaching of history, stems largely from classroom teachers' confusion
about the nature of history, and the widely held belief that history
contributes to the development of patriotism.
Much confusion about the nature of history would be eliminated if
teachers distinguished historical statements from past events. The histor-
ical statement, often referred to as the historical fact, is quite different
from the actual event. The event itself has disappeared, never to occur
again. An infinite number of statements can be made about any past
event. Historical data related to the Black experience constitute a gold
mine of information which can be used to teach students about the
nature and writing of history.' This kind of knowledge will not only help
them to become more adept decision-makers, but more intelligent con-
sumers of history. Conflicting accounts of slavery, the Civil War, and the
rebellions which took place in our cities in the sixties Can be used to
teach the concept of historical bias. To help students see the regional
influences on written history, the teacher can have them compare the
treatment of slavery in different textbooks as illustrated in the two
accounts below, one of which is from a state history of Mississippi and
the other from a junior high school Black history text:
ACCOUNT1
Slave Treatment. While there were some incidents involving the abusing of
slaves, public opinion and state law generally assured the slaves of good treat-
ment. Plantation owners usually cautioned their overseers against using brutal
practices. Naturally, there were some abuses on large plantations ... Most
people, however, favored kind treatment of slaves...'
ACCOUNT2
Under the slave codes, blacks were not allowed to own property or weapons.
They could not form groups without a white person present. They could not buy
or sell goods, or leave the plantation without permission of their master. In
towns and cities, blacks were required to be off the streets by a specified hour
each night. A slave could not testify in court against a white person. A slave who
was charged with a crime against a white person was therefore unable to defend
himself. Any slave who violated the laws was likely to be severely punished,
perhaps by death'_
Questions
I. Hew are these two accounts alike?
2. How are they different?
3. Why do you think that they are different?


[Page 184]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change167
4. Who do you think wrote the first account? The second account? Why?
5. Which account do you think is more accurate? Why?
6. Which author supports his statements with facts? Give specific examples.
7. Read other accounts on the treatment of slaves and write in your own words
about how the slaves were treated. How do your conclusions compare with
the accounts written by the two authors above?
The Value Component of Decision-Making
While higher level, scientific knowledge is necessary for reflective
decision-making, it is not sufficient. To make a reflective decision, the
social actor must also identify and clarify his values, and relate them to
the knowledge which he has derived through the process of social in-
quiry.
Because of the immense racial problems within our society that are
rooted in value confusion, the school should play a significant role in
helping students to identify and clarify their values, and in making value
choices intelligently. While the school has a tremendous responsibility to
help students to make moral choices reflectively, there is abundant
evidence that educators have largely failed to help students to deal with
moral issues intelligently.
Some teachers treat value problems like the invisible man; i.e., they
deny their existence. They assume that if students get all of the "facts"
straight, they can resolve racial problems. Such teachers may be said to
practice the cult of false objectivity. Other teachers use an evasion
strategy; when value problems arise in the classroom, they try to change
the subject to a more safe topic. Probably the most frequently used
approach to value education in the elementary and high school is the
inculcation of values which tare considered "right" by adults, or the
indoctrination of these values. Teachers who use this method assume
that adults know what the "correct" values are for all times and for
children from all cultural groups. Such values as justice, truth, freedom,
honesty, equality and love are taught with legendary heroes, stories,
rituals and patriot songs. This approach to value education is unsound
for several reasons. It assumes that most value conflicts and problems
result because children are unable to distinguish "good" from "bad"
values. However, this is not the case. Children can rather easily distin-
guish the good from the bad. Most value problems result because stu-
dents must often choose between two goods. When teachers use didac-
tic methods to teach children contradictory but equally "good" .falues,
their conflicts are intensified when they must choose between two goods.
Didactic inculcation of values also denies students free choice and
does not help them to develop a method for deriving and clarifying their


[Page 185]
"Each generation should have a right to determine its own values."
values. Each generation should have the right to determine its own
values. Children should be taught a process by which they can derive
their own values because we have no reliable way to predict the values
which a child will find functional in the future." Didactic strategies are
also unsound because there is no general agreement among adults about
what values should be inculcated or about their meanings. Diverse goals
and meanings have been proposed by various writers on moral educa-
tion. Didactic strategies are also invalid because we cannot expect
standards to guide a person's life unless those standards have been freely
chosen from alternatives, and after thoughtful consideration of the con-
sequences of the alternatives. Michael Scriven argues that it is immoral
for teachers and other adults to force our cultural values upon our
youth." He suggests that such values may not be worth passing on, and
that students should be taught how to decide on their own values. The
wider culture does an excellent job of indoctrinating its values; the
school, argues Scriven, should teach resistance to them.
Teachers should help students to develop a method (or process) for
deriving and clarifying their values rather than teach them a set of
predetermined values. This is the only approach to value education


[Page 186]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change169
which is consistent with a cultural pluralistic ideology and that is educa-
tionally sound. Perhaps no more serious value questions and problems
are raised in the classroom than during a study of the Black experience.
Black students have important questions about thvalue of Blackness,
their identity, and about effective strategies to use to release themselves
from institutionalized racism and colonization. I have developed a value
inquiry model that is presented in detail in my social studies methods
book which teachers can use while teaching the Black experience to help
students to identify, clarify and to reflectively derive their values." Space
prevents me from elaborating on the steps of this model here. However,
I will present it in outline form, and a sample exercise illustrating how
parts of it can be used during a study of the Black experience.
VALUE INQUIRY MODEL
a. Recognizing Value Problems
b. Describing Value Relevant Behavior
c. Naming Values Exemplified by Behavior
d. Determining Value Conflicts
e. Hypothesizing About Sources of Values
f. Naming Value Alternatives
g. Hypothesizing About the Consequences of Values
h. Choosing (Declaring Value Preferences)
i. Stating Reasons, Sources and Consequences of Personal Value
Choice(s)
For value inquiry lessons, the teacher may use case studies clipped
from the daily newspaper, such as incidents involving police attacks on
the Black Panthers, or cases related to the current "busing" controversy.
Children's literature, photographs, role-playing activities, and open-
ended stories related'to these kinds of incidents can also be effectively
used. In using a case study related to the Black Revolt of the sixties, for
example, the teacher can ack the students these kinds of questions:
1. What was the problem in this case?
2. What does the behavior of the persons involved tell us about what
was important to them?
3. How do you think that the values of the demonstrators differed from
those who were in power?
4. What are other values that the persons in the case could have en-
dorsed?


[Page 187]
170 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
5. What were the possible consequences of the values held by the
demonstrators?
6. What would you have done if your life experience had been similar to
the experiences of the persons who protested?
7. What might have been the consequences of your beliefs?
8. Could ycu have lived with those consequences?
During value inquiry lessons, the teacher should be careful not to
condemn values which are inconsistent with his beliefs. This is not to
suggest that the teacher should remain neutral on value issues, but rather
that he should not declare a value preference until the students have
expressed their value choices. Unless the teacher creates a classroom
atmosphere which will allow and encourage students to express their
true beliefs, value inquiry will simply become a game in which students
will try to guess what responses the teacher wants them to make. Even
the bigoted white student or the psychologically captivated Black stu-
dent should be able to express his beliefs freely and openly in the
classroom. Beliefs which are unexpressed cannot be rationally examined.
While wc. must eliminate racism in America in order to survive the
challenges of the twenty-first century, students must be able to reflec-
tively analyze racism and its effects before they can develop a commit-
ment to eliminate it. It should be stressed that this commitment must
come from the student; it cannot be imposed by the teacher.
Providing Opportunities for Social Action
Black people throughout the United States are victims of colonialism,
institutional racism, poverty and political powerlessness. When the
teacher identifies concepts and generalizations from the social sciences,
he should select those which will help students to make decisions and to
take actions to help eliminate these problems. This is absolutely impera-
tive if the social studies curriculum is going to help to liberate Black
people and other oppressed groups. After they have mastered higher
level knowledge related to these problems, and analyzed and clarified
their values, the teacher can ask the students to list the possible actions
which they can take regarding these problems in their school and com-
munity, and to predict the possible consequences of each alternative
course of action. Alternatives and consequences which the students state
should be realistic and based on knowledge which they have mastered
during the earlier phase of the unit. They should be intelligent predictive
statements and not ignorant guesses or wishful thinking. Students should
state data and reasons to support the alternatives and consequences
which they identify.


[Page 188]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change171
Students will be unable tosolvethe racial problems in their communi-
ties. However, they may be able to take some effective actions which can
improve the racial atmosphere in their classroom and school, or contrib-
ute to the resolution of the racial problems in the wider community
through some types of meaningful and effective social action or partici-
pation projects. Students should participate in social actioh projects only
after they have studied the related issues from the perspectives of the
social sciences, analyzed and clarified their values regarding them, iden-
tified the possible consequences of their actions, and expressed a willing-
ness to accept them. Since the school is an institution with racial prob-
lems which mirror those of the larger society, students can be provided
practice in shaping public policy by working to eliminate racism in their
classroom, school or school system.
Racism, drug abuse, forced bussing, the closing of Black schools, class
stratification, theft and arson are the kinds of problems which schools
have on which students can take concerted action. Other social action
projects, especially for more mature students, can take place in the wider
community. Social action may take the form of observation, participa-
tion or leadership. The school can work with civil rights groups and
political organizations to involve students in meaningful and purposeful
social action activities. The levels of involvement in such activities can
be diverse.The primary purpose of such activities should be to provide
students with opportunities to develop a sense of political efficacy and
not to provide community services,although both goals can be attained
in the mosteffectivetypes of projects.
Student participation in social action activities within our society is
not without precedence. However, the most dramatic and effective social
action by American students has usually been undertaken by college
students. During the Black Revolt of the 1960's, students comprised one
of the most cogent and effective components. The Black Revolt of the
1960's was signaled when four Black college students sat down at an "all
white" lunch counter at a Woolworth's store in Greensboro, North
Carolina on February I, 1960. Throughout the Black Revolt of he
1960's, students remained active and influential. They helped to desegie-
gate restaurants, interstate transportation, schools and swimming pools
with such tactics as sit-ins, freedom-rides, and swim-ins. Student effec-
tiveness in the Black Revolt of the sixties is one of the most dramatic
indications of the potential of student power in America. Protests by
students in the sixties also resulted in enlightened curriculum reform in
public schools and colleges.
In discussing ways in which students have participated in social action
and protest, we do not mean to suggest that all nr even most of their
actions were maximumly effective and undertaken afterreflective


[Page 189]
172TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
thought. However, we must stress the fact that students will become
involved in important socialissues in the community and nation
whether the school facilitates that involvement or not. Schools did little,
if anything, to facilitate the involvement of students in the actions which
are reviewed above. The involvement of students in social action must
become institutionalized within the social studies curriculum so that
their actions can become both more effective and thoughtfully directed. ,
Some of the student action which occurred on our college campuses was
irresponsible and irrational. A social action focused social studies curric-
ulum may have made such actions time effective and significant. In a
1971 publication, the National Council for the Social Studies stresses the
need for educators to involve students in social action projects:
Extensive involvement by students of all ages in the activities of their commu-
nity is ... essential. Many of these activities may be in problem areas held, at
least by some, to be controversial; many will not be. The involvement may
take the form of observation or information-seeking; such as fieldtrips,
attending meetings, and interviews. It may take the form of political cam-
paigning, community service or improvement, or even responsible demonstra-
tion. The school should not only provide channels for such activities but build
them into the design of its social studies program, kindergarten through grade
twelve."
Conclusion
We have argued that effective Black studies programs must be based
on a sound and clearly articulated rationale in order to result in effective
student learning. A rationale has been suggested for the reader's consid-
eration. We stated that the main goal of Black history should be to help
students develop the ability to make reflective decisions so that they can
resolve personal problems and shape public policy by participating in
intelligent social action. In other words, we suggested that the goal of
Black history should be to help students become effective change agents.
Higher level, interdisciplinary knowledge, social science inquiry, and
value inquiry are necessary for sound decision-making and reflective
social action. History can be used both as a framework to help students
master decision-making skills and to become familiar with the Black
experience since it is concerned with the totality of man's past. Histori-
cal data can also evoke many value questions. Since the present is
intimately related to the past, history can provide students with insights
which are essential for making decisions related to the urgent social
problems which are polarizing our society.
The most important variable for the successful implementation of the
kind of Black studies program proposed in this essay is the classroom
I


[Page 190]
"We can help students to attain humanistic values only withina classroom atmos-
phere which tolerates differences and where studentsare free to express their feel-
ings."
teacher. For teachers to help Black students to develop effectivesocial
action skills, they must learn how social science reflectsthe norms,
values and goals of the ruling and powerfulgroups in society, and how it
validates those belief systems whichare functional for groups in power
and dysfunctional for oppressed and powerlessgroups. Many teachers
perpetuate the historical and social science myths which they learned in
school and that are pervasive in textbooks because theyare unaware of
the racist assumptions on which social science research isoften based.
Much information in textbooks is designedto support the status quo
And to keep powerless ethnic groups at the lowerrungs of the social
ladder.
To help students derive higher levels of knowledge usingthe Black
experience, and to make sound decisions aboutrace relations, the
teacher must accept the scientific method as the most valuableway to
173


[Page 191]
174 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
attain knowledge. He must be willing to allow students to examine and
derive their own beliefs. He cannot bt a demagogue who tries to force
his beliefs on students. We:can help students to attain humanistic values
only within a classroom :atmosphere which tolerates differences and
where students are free to express their felings. Beliefs which are unex-
pressed cannot be rationally examined. Mille we must eliminate racism
in Ame:ica in order to survive the challenge:. of the twenty-first century,
students must be able to analyze racism rationally before they can
develop a commitment to eliminate it.
No school can truly educate its citizens unless it teaches about the
aspirations and struggles of Third World man. His experience is part of
the human drama, and edur 'lion should deal with man's total experi-
ence. To base a curriculum may on the experiences of partof mankind
will not only inculcate a false sense of superiority in white students and
make Black students feel Inferior, but it will make whites think that they
are separate and apart from the rest of mankind, and believe, as many
do today, that they are the only humans on earth. The modern world
cannot survive this kind of insidious ethnocentrism.
FOOTNOTES
' James A. Banks, "A Content Analysis of the Black Amencan in Textbooks," Social
Education, Vol. 33 (December, 1969), pp. 954-957, 963.
' Larry Cuban, "Black History, Negro History, and White Folk," in James A. Banks and
Willian W. Joyce (Editors), Teaching Social Studies ,o Culturally Different Children
(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1971), p. 318.
' Nathan Hare, "The Teaching of Black History and Culture in the Secondary Schools,"
Social Education, Vol. 33 (April, 1969), p. 388.
' Martin Kitson, "Black Studies: A Plea for Perspective," reprinted from The Crisis
(October, 1969), with the permission of The Crisis Publishing Company, Inc.
' NCSS Task Force (Gary Manson, Gerald Marker, Anna Ochoa, and Jan Tucker),
"Social Studies Curriculum Guidelines" (Washington, D.C.: National Council for the
Social Studies), unpublished second draft, p. 17.
`Stanley M. Elkins, Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual Life
(New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1963).
' For other examples see James A. Banks, Teaching the Black Experience: Methods and
Materials (Belmont, California: Fearon Publishers, 1970).
' John K. Bettersworth, Mississippi Yesterday and Today (Austin, Texas: Steck-Vaughn,
1964), p. 143. This book is currently used in the state of Mississippi.
' James A. Banks, March Toward Freedom: A History of Black Americans (Belmont,
Calif.: Fearon Publishers, 1970), p. 16.


[Page 192]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change175
' For a further discussion of this point see Maurice P. Hunt and Lawrence E. Metcalf,
Teaching High School Social Studies: Second Edition (New York: Harper and Row,
1968), Chapter 6.
" Louis E. Raths, Mem!! Harmin, and Sidney B. Simon, Values and Teachidg: Working
with Values in the Classroom (Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company,
1966), p. 28.
"2 Michael Scriven, "The Social Studies in the 21st Century: What is Needed?" A paper
presented at the 50th Annual Meeting of the National Council for the Social Studies, New
York, New York, November 24, 1970.
"James A. Banks (With Contributions by Ambrose A. Clegg, Jr.), Teaching Strategies
for the Social Studies: Inquiry, Valuing and Decision-Making (Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, 1973), Chapter 12, "Valuing: Inquiry Modes and Strategies."
NCSS Task Force on Curriculum Guidelines (Gary Manson, Anna Ochoa,
Gerald Marker and Jan Tucker), Social Studies Curriculum GuidelinesNashington,
D.C.: National Council for the Social Studies, 1971), p. 15.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Herbert Aptheker (Ed.), A Documentary History of the Negro People in the United States
(New York: The Citadel Press), Two Volumes. Although these two volumes treat Black
history only through 1910, it is still one of the best collections of Black history docu
ments available for the periods from colonial times up to the turn of the century.
Houston A. Baker, Jr., Black Literature in Americ. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971). A
gold mine of Black literature, from Black folklore to contemporary writers such as
LeRoi Jones, Hoyt Fuller and Don Lee, is contained in this comprehensive anthology
which teachers can use to vitalize their social studies programs.
James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time (New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1963). This book
contains a collection of perceptive, courageous and widely acclaimed essays by one of
the most distinguished writers of this century. The teacher should also examine his
Notes of A Native Son (Dell), and Nobody Knows My Name (Dell).
James A. Banks, March Toward Freedom: A History of Black Americans (Belmont:
Fearon, 1970). An illustrated history of Black Americans written especially for teen-
agers.
James A. Banks (With Contributions by Ambrose A. Clegg, Jr.), Teaching Strategies For
The Social Studies: Inquiry, Valuing and Decision-Making (Reading: Addison-Wesley,
1973). This general methods text provides a conceptual framework, with illustrations
throughout, that will help the teacher to integrate ethnic content into the regular social
studies curriculum. The book is designed for use by teachers in the elementary and
junior high school grades.
James A. Banks, Teachi ^^Mack Experience: Methods and Materials (Belmont:
Fearon, 1970). Thiswith ways to teach units in Black Studies and how to
integrate ethnic conkregular social studies and language arts curricula. The
major portion of thtconcerned with a description of promising teaching
strategies. An extensive J.graphy constitutes the final chapter.


[Page 193]
176TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
James A. Banks & Jean D. Grambs (Eds.),Black Self-Concept: Implications for Edu:a.
tion and Social Science(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972). This book contains a series of
original papers by educators and social scientists that explore effective ways to help
Black children attain more positive self-images and academic success in school. The
.divergent points of view presented should stimulate a continuing dialogue.
Andrew Billingsley,Black Families in White America(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
.1968). A noted Black social scientist challenges many popular myths which have been
.perpetuated by white social scientists about the Black family in this seminal and
compassionate book.
Arna Bontemps,American NegroPoetry (New York: Hill and Wang, 1963). "The Negro
Speaks of Rivers," "Mother to Son," and many other immortal poems by Langston
Hughes and other gifted Black poets are found in this immensely popular book. The
newer Black poets, such as Niki Giovanni and Don Lee. are absent, but the Harlem
Renaissance group is well represented.
B. A. Botkin (Ed.),Lay My Burden Down: A Folk History of Slavery(Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1945). This book contains a fine collection of documents witten
by former slaves which the social studies teacher will rind very useful when he structures
inquiry lessons using primary resources. It is one of the most comprehensive collections
of slave documents that is available in book form.
Ruth Kearney Carlson,Emerging Humanity: Multi-Ethnic Literature For Children and
Adolescents (Dubuque: William C. Brown, 1972). Although this book is occasionally
flawed by white bias, it contains many useful sug "estions and resources which the
teacher can use to enrich his social studies program with ethnic literature.
Bradford Chambers (Ed.),Chronicles of Black Protest(New York: Mentor Books, 1968).
This book contains an excellent collection of documents on the Black experience, with
extensive commentaries by the editor preceding each document.
Abraham Chapman (Ed.),Black Voices:AnAnthology of Afro-American Literature(New
York: Mentor Books, 1968). Fiction, autobiography, poetry and literary criticism by
eminent Black writers are included in this thoughtful anthology. Arm Bontemps, Lang-
ston Hughes, Richard Wright, Claude McKay, Countee Cullen and W.E.B. Duliais are
among the brilliant writers represented in this book. It is available in an inexpensive
paperback edition.
Kenneth B. Clark,Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social Power(New York: Harper and Row,
1965). In one of the most widely acclaimed books of recent times, Professor Clark
poignantly and sensitively describes the devastating effects which the Black ghetto has
on its victims. This book is an excellent introduction to lower class Black life in the cl.,,.
Angela Y. Davis (and Other Political Prisoners),If They Come in the Morning .1 ;w
York: Signet Books, 1971). A powerful and perceptive book about race and political
prisoners in the United States. This book would be an excellent supplement to a unit on
our judicial system.
Melvin Drimmer (Ed.),Black History(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969). This de.
servedly popular documentary history of the Black American contains excellent and
informative commentaries by the editor. The teacher can use many of these documents
with older students.
Editors of Ebony,Ebony Pictorial History c.;lack History(Chicago: Johnson Publishing
Company, 1971), Three Volumes. A beautifully illustrated and well written, detailed
history of Black Americans in three volumes which can be profitably read by young
readers, as well as by adults.
Russell Endo and William Strawbridge (Eds.),Perspectives on Black America(Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1970). Both scholarly and popular writings make up this useful
collection of papers which provides perceptive sociological perspectives on the Black
experience in America. Contributors include Claude Brown, St. Clair Drake, C. Eric
Lincoln and Jonathan Kozol.
Charlotte Epstein,Affective Subjects in the Classroom: Exploring Race, Sex, and Drugs
(Scranton: International Textbook Company, 1972). A number of ingenious techniques
which teachers can use to stimulate thinking about race-related topics are contained in
this useful book.


[Page 194]
1
soIfa,2.8LI-amww.Lai2.2
L36
0
I. 1
.2
40
1.6 4
1111 I .8
.25IIIII
l.4
MICROCOPY RESOLUTION- TEST CHART
NAT1*Al BUREAU OF:SfENIARDSi1963rA
_.


[Page 195]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change177
Lillian Faderman & Barbara Br4sksw (Eds.), American Ethnic Writing: Speaking For
Ourselves (Glenview: Scott Foresman, 1969). Exciting selections from literature written
by many ethnic groups are captained in this carefully compiled anthology. The teacher
will find it useful for both literiture and social :Audies classes.
Jack D. Forbes, Afro-Americais in The West: A Handbook for Educators (Berkeley: Far
West Laboratory for Educational Research and Development, 1967). This book includes
an excellent historical and sociological overview of the Black man .n the West, sugges-
tions for teachers and administrators, and a comprehensive bibliography on the Black
man in the United States.
John Hoc, Franklin and Isidore Starr (Eds.). , The Negro in 20th Century America (New
York: Vintage Books, 1967). A thoughtful anthology which explores various aspects of
Black life and culture in the 20th century which has been, unfortunately, neglected.
High school students will find this bookinformative. Contributors range from Malcolm
X to Gunnar Myrdal.
Robert Goldston, The Negro Revolution (New York: Macmillan, 1968). This is an ex-
tremely well written history for young people, although the vocabulary is difficult. The
illustrations are sparse and dull.
Milton M. Gordon, Assimilation in American Life (New York: Oxford University Press,
1964). In this widely acclaimed and award-winning book, the author sets forth a number
of theories about cultural and structural assimilation that the teacher will find helpful in
understanding ethnic minority groups in America.
Robert L. Green (Ed.), Racial Crisis in American Education (Chicago: Follett Educational
Coilmration, 1969). A brilliant and Lard-hitting collection of papers which explores
various dimensions of educating Black children in both integrated and segregated
settings. The book is distinguished by the large number of Black contributors.
George Henderson, To Live in Freedom: Human Relations Today (Norman: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1972). This lucidly written book by an expert in human relations
contains valuable. ideas and suggestions which social studies teachers can use to clarify
their racial attitudes and perceptions, and to create a more humane atmosphere in their
classrooms.
Florence Jackson, The Black Man in America 1791-1861 (New York: Franklin Watts,
1971). One in a series of books by Mrs. Jackson, this volume is well written, accurate
and contains good drawings and photographs. It is designed for younger readers.
George Jackson, Soledad Brother: The Prison Letters of George Jackson (New York:
Bantam Bcioks, 1970). These brilliant and cogent letters reveal a young imprisoned
Black man's attempt to understand an oppressive and dehumanized world. This is a
courageous and touching book.
Stephen M. Joseph (Ed.), The Me Nobody Knows: Children's Voices from the Ghetto
(New York: Avon Books, 1969). This book contains an unusual collection of beautiful,
poignant, and revealing poems by children in the Black ghetto which tells much about
their limited but eventful world.
William W. Joyce and James A. Banks (Eds.), Teaching the Language Arts to Culturally
Different Children (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1971). A collection of articles and origi-
nal papers designs'help teachers plan effective language and literature programs for
children from diver , cultural groups. Ways to use ethnic literature to enrich the social
studies curriculum are explored.
Julius Lester, To Be A Slave (New York: Dell, 1968). A poignant collection of documents
written by former slaves which will evoke deep feelings in the reader. The book was
written for young readers. It was a Newberry Medal runner-up.
August Meier and Elliott M. Rudwick, From Plantation to Ghetto: An Interprctive
History of American Negroes (New York: Hill and Wang, 1966). This book is an
excellent history of Black Americans that contains perceptive interpretations of ideolo-
gies and protest movements which have emerged within Black communities in America.
Milton Melt= (Ed.), In Their Own Words: A History of the American Negro (New
York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1964, 1965, 1967), Three volumes. This is one of the few
collections of documents which are designed especially for the middle grade student.
The books are illustrated and the size of the print is ideal for the young reader.----z


[Page 196]
178TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Louise Meriwether, Daddy Was a Number Runner (New York: Pyramid Books, 1970).
The author's heroine, Francie Coffin, takes the reader into her Harlem- world. The
reader experiences the joys and sorrows of being Black, poor and powerless. This is a
powerful and significant book.
Gertrude Noar, Sensitizing Teachers to Ethnic Groups (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1972).
This short book by a veteran in intergroup education provides important hints as to how
the teacher can become more sensitive to ethnic groups within his classroom and the
larger society. This book is in the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith series on
minority groups. The entire series is recommended.
Gilbert Osofsky, The Burden of Race: A Documentary History of Negro-White Relations
in America (Nev:ork: Harper and Row, 1967). This is an excellent history of Black-
white relations in America vividly revealed by the men who were the stars in our racial
drama.
Talcott Parsons and Kenneth B. Clark (Eds.), The Negro American (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1965): The essays in this book, which originally appeared in two issues of
Daedalus, form one of the most scholarly and thorough books which treats diverse
aspects of Black life in America. Daniel P. Moynihan, Lee Rainwater, Oscar Handlin,
and Thomas F. Pettigrew are among the distinguished contributors.
Vincent R. Rogers and Thomas P. Weinland (Eds.), Teaching Social Studies in The Urban
Classroom (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1972). The teachers who contributed to this
book describe promising strategies that they used to teach about the experiences of
ethnic groups in both inner-city and suburban classrooms. Some of the chapters contain
useful bibliographies.
Karel Rose, A Gift of the Spirit: Readings in Blaik Literature for Teachers (New York:
Holt, 'I 971). Helpful teaching hints as well as exciting and involving selections from
Black literature are contained in this book. Many social science concepts and general-
izations can be taught with the resources in this volume.
Peter I. Rose, They And We: Racial and Ethnic Relations in the United States (New
York: Random House, 1964). #1 good introduction.torace, chniCity and social status in
America which can be read with understanding by high school students. The author's
distinction between prejudice and discrimination is especially useful.
Kenneth M. Stampp, The Peculiar Institution (New York: Vintage Books, 1956). An
extremely scholarly and de cply moving book which shatters many pervasive stereotypes
about slavery. This book well deserves the acclaim which it has received.
Dorothy Sterling, Tear Down the Walls! A History of the Black Revolution in the United
States (New York: Signet Books, 1968). A deeply moving and extremely well written
history of Black Americans designed especially for young readers. The book contains
good illustrations and reads more like a popular book than a schoolbook.
Piri Thomas, Down These Mean Streets (New York: The New American Library, 1967).
This is a powerful and touching autobiography about the problems which haunted a
Puerto Rican American whose skin happened to be dark. The book reveals the pain
which our society inflicts upon those who are members of stigmatized groups.
Staten W. Webster (Ed.), Knowing and Understanding the Socially Disadvantaged: Eth-
nic Minority Groups (Scranton: International Textbook Company, 1972). The teacher
will find articles in this anthology which deal with all of America's major ethnic
minority groups. It is a useful book for general information for the teacher.
Frederick Williams (Ed.), Language and Poverty: Perspectives on a Theme (Chicago:
Markham Publishing Co., 1970). This scholarly and sensitive book of essays will help
the teacher to understand:the variety of languages spoken by America's ethnic minority
groups and other poor children. Joan C. Baratz, William Labov and Roger Shuy are
among the notable contributors.
John A. Williams, The Man Who Cried I Am (New York: New American Library, 1967).
The author unfolds a frightening but credible tale of a master plot designed to eliminate
Blacks in America. The story centers around the protagonist's discovery of the plot and
his attempt to disclose it.


[Page 197]
Teaching Black Studies for Social Change179
Walter Wilson (Ed.), The Selected Writings of W. E. B. DuBois (New York: Mentor
Books, 1970). This is a fine collection of the writings of the brilliant Black leader and
sociologist. Selections are included from the classic, The Philadelphia Negro, as well as
from DuBois' creative writings and policy statements.
Richard Wright, Black Boy (New York: Harper and Row, 1937). This is the gripping story
of what it meant to be Black and insightful in the South in an earlier era by one of
America's most distinguished and gifted writers.
Samuel F. Yette, The Choice: The Issue of Black Survival in America (New York:
Berkeley Publishing Corporation, 1971). In this alarming and disturbing book, Yette
argues that the extermination of the Black man in America is a genuine possibility. His
argument is cogent and thought-provokihg.


[Page 198]
Q
Carlos E. Cortes
CARLOS E. CORTES is Associate Professor of History and Chairman
of the Mexican American Studies Program at the University of Califor-
nia, Riverside. Professor Cortes was griduated from the University of
California, Berkeley .(Phi Beta Kappa). He holds graduate degrees in
journalism and foreign trade from Columbia University and the Ameri-
can Institute for Foreign Trade.* He received his M. A. in Portuguese
and Ph. D. in history at the University of New Mexico. He was formerly
Chairman of the Latin American Studies Program and Assistant to the
Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs at the University of California,
Riverside. Professor Cortes has served as a consultant to a wide variety
of institutions and agencies, including the United States Commission on
Civil Rights and the Ford Foundation. In 1971, he was appointed by
the California State Department of Education to serve on an Ethnic
Education Task Force to evaluate social 'studies textbooks. He is a
contributing editor for Aztlan, Chicano Journal of the Social Sciences
and the Arts. He has written for Aztlin and the Journal of Church and
State, and has edited Mexican Americans and Educational Change and
Bibliografia da Historia do Rio Grande do Sul (Periodo Republicano).
Forthcoming works include Blacks, Chicanos, Native Americans, Puerto
Ricans: History and Self-Expression, Struggle for Aztlan: A History of
Mexican-American Resistance, The Bent Cross: A History of the Mexi-
can American in the San Bernardino Valley, and Gaucho Politics in
Brazil: Rio Grande do Sul in Brazilian Politics, 1930-1964.
180


[Page 199]
CARLOS E. CORTES
Teaching
the Chicano Experience
The Mexican American was born in December, 1845, when the United
States annexed the Lone Star Republic into the union as the state of
Texas, thereby transforming 5,000 Mexican Texans (Texans of Mexican
descent) into Mexican Americans.' The following year, as part of United
States war operations against Mexico, United States military forces
invaded and occupied the Mexican Northwest (today the U.S. South-
west). Through the ensuing 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the
United States obtained official sanction for this gigantic land grab (one
third of Mexico's territory) and, at the same time, added to the Chicano'
population by proffering United States citizenship to the 75,000 Mexi-
cans living in the dismembered territory'
Since those mid-nineteenth-century events, the Mexican-American
population has grown until Chicanos' now form the nation's second
largest ethnic minority (some six to ten million)' and make their homes
in .every state in the union.' Yet despite their long, rich history, their
growing population, and their increasing geographical dispersal, not
until the Chicano Movement of the 1960's and 1970's did Mexican
Americans truly begin to penetrate the American' consciousness. And
only in the last few years have significant numbers of American educa-
tors become interested in incorporating the study of the Chicano experi-
ence into our educational system.
Unfortunately, this long-overdue educational reform has met with
uneven success. In part this has resulted from continued lack of knowl-
edge and awareness by many educators, lack of reformist concern by
others, and even outright resistance to change by some. Even those
181


[Page 200]
182. TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
interested in making the study of the Chicano experience an intrinsic
part of our educational system have encountered difficulty in transform-
ing commitment into effective pedagogy. To a degree this difficulty
stems from the short time during which educators have dealt seriously
with teaching the Chicano experience. But this difficulty also stems from
the very nature of our society and our educational process.
Within the social studies, three basic elements are necessary for the
effective teaching of the Chicano experienceawareness of the major
obstacles to understanding the Chicano experience, development of new
exploratory concepts for analyzing the Chicano experience, and use of
innovative teaching strategies for exploring the Chicano experience. In
the following pages, I will devote myself to these three basic issues.
Obstacles to Effective Teaching
Four major obstacles impede the effective teaching of the Chicano
experience. These are: (1) the persistence of societal stereotypes of the
Mexican American, (2) the inadequacy of existent social studies text-
books, (3) the general lack of knowledge about the Mexican-American
past and present, and (4) the rigidity of traditional frames of reference
for examining the Chicano experience.
Our educational system does not operate in a vacuum. It reflects the
society around it and deals with students produced by that society.
Unfortunately, the teaching of the Chicano experience is severely limited
by the fact that students come to school pre-conditioned in their percep-
tions of the Mexican American.
In both historical and contemporary terms, U. S. society has been
pervaded subtly and sometimes not too subtly by anti- Mexican preju-
dice. The roots of this prejudice stretch back over the centuries to the
European power struggle for New World domination. Since Spain had
arrived first from Europe and had claimed most of the New World, it
became the prime target for other European contenders. Through its
own vigorous internal debate over the treatment of Indians, Spain un-
wittingly furnished fuel for its antagonists' propaganda machines. Using
Spanish cruelty toward Indians as the base and blending in other anti-
Spanish themes, these contending nations propagated a collection of
anti-Spanish stereotypes which became known as the Black Legend
(leyenda negra). English colonists carried this Hispanophobia to the
New World. Here their constant conflict with Spaniards and residents of
Spanish possessions reinforced anti-Spanish attitudes and made anti-
Hispanism an intrinsic, if sometimes unrecognized or unadmitted, part
of the national psyche'
Paralleling anti-Hispanic prejudice in the Anglo mentality was a feel-
t


[Page 201]
Teaching the Chicano Experience183
ing of Anglo superiority over non-whites, including Native Americans.'
Moreover, Englishmen and Anglo Americans took a particularly scorn-
ful view of the genetic and cultural offspring of Hispanic-Indian fu-,
sionthe mestizowhom they considered a "mongrelized" product of
two inferior peoples.
As the United States expanded westward during the early nineteenth
century, it found this Mexican mestizo in itsway. Texas Revolution and
Mexican War propaganda emotionally supercharged the already exis-
tent anti-Mexican attitudes, as did such other anti-Mexicin prose as
nineteenth-century travelers' accounts and the popular dime novel,
which commonly used the theme of the triumph of the good Anglo-
American cowboy over the degenerate Mexican mestizo.' The dime
novel,-with its blatant racism, has disappeared. However, it is clear that
its prejudice-producing role has been taken over by more subtle image
purveyors.
From the time he is born, an American is bombarded by anti-Mexi-
can impulses, including thoie spread by the mass media. Let us take a
few examples. Frito Bandito and his serape-clad, sombrero-wearing,
mariana-saying Mexican brothers in the U.S. advertising menagerie leap
to mind as obvious perpetrators of anti-Mexican stereotypes." Comic
strips, such as- "Gordo," the living Mexican stereotype, help to reinforce
these negative Mexican images. Whether intentionally, uncaringly, or
unwittingly, the motion picture industry has produced a long series of
prejudice-building movies. For example, in the "my-bad-guy-is-better-
than-yours" movie genre, such films as "The Magnificent Seven," "The
Professionals," and "The Wild Bunch" celebrate the victory of tiny
bands of Anglo gunmen over whole armies of Mexicansthe reassertion
of Anglo superiority even at the bad-guy-to-bad-guy level."
In short, the classical anti-Spanish Black Legend has given way to a
Modern Black Legend: anti:mestizo, anti-Mexican, and anti-Chicano.
As I have defined it elsewhere, this Modern Black Legend is "a negative
attitude toward, stereotype of, or prejudice against the Mexican Ameri-
can created by the steady bombardment of the American mind by anti-
Mexican sensory impulses, made more effective by the absence of any
significant institutionalized defense or counter-attack against these im-
pulses."
In teaching the Chicano experience, therefore, the social studies
teacher must confront the Modern' Black Legend's pervasive effects on
his students. But the problem does not end here. Not only must the
teacher contend with anti-Chicano prejudice-creating and stereotype-
building aspects of society, he must also come to grips in the classroom
with text materials which, in relation to the Chicano, are almost always
inadequate and often clearly destructive.


[Page 202]
184 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Inadequate Textbooks
The Mexican American has always suffered in social studies text-
books." For the past four years I have been deeply involved in analyzing
elementary and secondary school social studies textbooks and have
found little in them which would specifically contribute to the pride of
the young Mexican American, but much that could assault hisego and
reinforce a concept of Anglo-American superiority over the Mexican
American. Social studies texts usually either ignore or distort the Mexi-
can-American experience (as well as the experiences- of other ethnic
minorities). Relatively few texts specifically discuss the Mexican Ameri-
can, and those which do devote at most a few inadequate (and often
inaccurate) pages to this topic. Therefore, the student's image of the
Chicano experience is derived tangentiallyfrom depictions of his In-
dian, Spanish, and Mexican ancestorsand the image is a defeatistone.
U.S. history- texts generally say little about the Mexican- American's
Indian heritage, except for an occasional line or soon Aztec and Mayan
civilization. The .long, rich history of the Mexican Indiansincluding
their many scientific, educational, cultural, societal, governmental, and
economic accomplishmentsremains missing from these books. The
major impression of the pre-Columbian Indians -isone of defeat at the
hands of the Spanish conqueror.
Then what about Spain, the conqueror? Usually these books containa
few more lines about Spain, but these too are suffused with negativism.
The student gets no sense of Spain's brilliant cultureor contributions to
world civilization, but merely receives a unidimensional Black Legend
image of Spaniards as oppressors of New World Indians. However,
when faced with an English rival, the Spaniard, too, turns outa loser,
usually dramatized by a lengthy, culturally chauvinistic depiction of
England's victory over the Spanish Armada in 1588.
Independent Mexico receives somewhat more attention than Spainor
pre-Columbian Mexico, but the emphasis on defeat remains. Mexico
seldom appears in U.S. history texts except when being defeatedor
invaded by the U.S. or by those of Anglo-American descent,as in the
1835-1836 war for Texas independence, the 1846-1848 U.S.-Mexican
War, and the 1914 U.S. occupation of Vera Cruz. By selecting Anglo
victories over Mexico as the principalmeans of portraying the latter,
textbook authors, whether intentionally or unintentionally, reinforce
feelings of Anglo superiority and Mexican-American inferiority.
So much for traditional U.S. history texts. But what about the modern
inquiry method social studies textbooks? Although their framework is
often altered from chronological historical narrative to topicaltreatment
of various aspects of life, society, and culture, the traditional cultural


[Page 203]
Teaching the Chicano Experience185
biases generally remain when theie books deal with matters directly
pertinent to or tangentially relevant to the Chicano experience.
Ironically, the Mexican American suffers from, tokenism even in ex-
poss of textbook treatment of minorities and in so-called multi-ethnic
syllabiAn Michael B. Kane's recent 148-page Minorities in Textbooks:
A Study of Their Treatment in Social Studies Texts, Mexican Americans
receive only one page as part of a six-page section on the "Spanish
Speaking."" And in Warren J. Halliburton and William Loren Katz's
recent American Majorities and Minorities: A Syllabus of UnitedStates
History for Secondary Schools, Chicanos receive limited, sporadic, and
inaccurate treatment."
Knowledge and Frames of Reference
To societal stereotypes and inadequate textbooks must be added two
other basic pedagogical obstacles limited knowledge about- and rigid
traditional frames of reference concerning the Chicano experience. Our
knowledge is limited not only by the relatively modest amount of re-
search done on the Chicano past, but also because most of that research
has been concentrated on a small number of topics." Most major areas
of the.Chicand experience have been barely touched upon. or entirely
ignored by researchers. We have only begun to illuminate the totality of
the Chicano experience. Our current knoWledge, which only hints at that
vibrant past, must be used sensitively with this limitation in mind."
Similarly, the teacher must also eontend with invalid traditional
frames of reference, whose persistence in society and education has
hindered the study of the Chicano experience. Lei _me mention merely
five of these frames of reference:
(1) the idea that U.S. history is an essentially unidirectional east-to-
west phenomenon,
(2) the attempt to explain the Chicano experience by labeling it lust
like" the experiences of Blacks, Native Americang, or various immigrant
groups,
(3) the view of the Chicano experience as essentially homogeneous,
with most Mexican Americans following a single stereotyped historical
pattern,
(4) the concept of the "awakening Mexican American," arising from a
century-long siesta,
(5) the attempt to explain the Chicano experience by presenting a
parade of Mexican heroes and individual Mexican-American success
stories.


[Page 204]
186 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
In their place, I would like to suggest and briefly discuss the following
five alternative frames of reference, which I call exploratory concepts for
analyzing the Chicano experience:
Traditional Frames
of Reference
(I) U.S. history as an east-
to-west phenomenon
(2) "just like" explanations
(3) Chicano homogeneity
(4) "awakeningMexican
American"
(5) heroes and success sto-
ries
Suggested Alternative
Exploratory Concepts
(1) Greater America concept
(2) comparative ethnic expe-
riences
(3) Chicano diversity
(4) history of activity
(5) the Chicano people
The Greater America Concept
One of the basic structural concepts of U.S. social studies has been the
culturally distorted idea that the United States is strictlyan Anglo
product which 'began on the east coast and ,flowed west. At best, most
books on U.S. history and society give only token recognition to the fact
that cultures existed in the West prior to the coming of the European,
that explorers and settlers came north from Mexico into thatarea during
the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries,
and that Mexicans were living in the Southwest when the U.S. invaded
the area in 1846. Little substantive attention is paid to the northward
flow of culture and society from central Mexico or its impacton the pre-
1846 American Southwest.
In order to create true intercultural understanding, the social studies
must be reoriented on the basis that the Greater American heritage
developed from the dual advance of societies from the Atlantic coast
west and from Mexico City north, as well as from the fusions and
conflict between these advancing cultures and the already existent
Southwestern civilizations." For students to understand the Greater
America in all of its cultural and ethnic dimensions, the study of the
Mexican heritage of the U.S. must become an intrinsic part of the social
studies process, beginning with the first year of school. The teaching of
social studies must include, from grade one on, the continuous, parallel
study of Anglo and Mexican cultural and societal patterns, their contri-
butions, their conflict, and the process or failure of fusionor coexistence.


[Page 205]
".. . thestudy of th3 Mexican her-
itage of the U.S. must become an
intrinsic part of the social studies
process, beginning with the first
year of school."
In this manner, the social studies would begin operating on the reality of
this dual heritage by examiningsuch bicultural topics as:
(I) explorers and settlers of both the Mexican Southwest and the Atlantic
colonies,
(2) Native American civilizations and their relations with expanding U.S.. soci-
ety from the east and expanding Mexican society from the south,
(3) types of economic systems that developed in the western and eastern sec-
tions of our country,
(4) various concepts of law, land, and water rights which became implanted
throughout the country within different cultural settings.
(5) Mexican and U.S. political systems,
(6) Mexican and U.S. class and caste structures, and
(7) ethnic relations in the U.S. and Mexico.
This continuous Greater America approach can reduce the inherent
ethnocentrism which has always plagued U.S. social studies and place in
proper perspective the bicultural heritage and multi-ethnic reality of the
United States.
Comparative Ethnic Experiences
The teaching of the Chicano experience has also suffered from mis-
guided attempts to describe Chicanos by explaining them in terms of
superficially similar experiences of other U.S. ethnic groups. This means
simplistic depictions of the Chicano experience as "just like" those of
Blacks, Native Americans, or various immigrant groups.
The Chicano experience does have certain similarities with the experi-
ence of each of these groups. However, social studies teachers must
187


[Page 206]
1
,
188TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
avoid the comfort ofeasy generalizations, for just as there are similari-
ties, there are salient differences which invalidate a simple "just like"
approach. For example, like Blacks, Native Americans, and Asian
Americans (but unlike Europeanimmigrant groups),-Chicanos can right-
fully attribute part of their sufferings to racial prejudice. Like Native
Amer:lans (but unlike Blacks, Asian Americans, or European immi-
grants), Chicanos were one of the two major ethnic groups which estab-
lished large-scale societies prior to the coming of Anglos and, through
military conquest, became aliens in their own land. Like European and
Asian_ immigrants (but unlike Blacks or Native Americans), Chicanos
have seen their numbers increased in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries by a major flow of free immigration.
These few examples demonstrate that the Chicano experience has
parallel aspects in other ethnic experiences, but that as a unique com-
posite, it contrasts with any other individual ethnic experience. More-
over, just as these, three factorsracial prejudice, conquest and alien-
ation in theirown land, and flow of free immigrationare useful analyt-
ical tools for comparing ethnic experiences, any number of such catego-
ries can be devised for ethnic comparative analysis. This conceptual
frame of reference should help the student in developing logical analyt-
ical thinking, help sensitize him to cultural nuances, and help eradicate
the distorting tendency to explain the Chicano (or other ethnic) experi-
ence in simplistic "just like" terms.
Chicano Diversity
In examining the Chicano experience, the social studies teacher must
avoid not only simplistic "just like" depictions. He must also reject
another equally convenient, but equally distorting traditional frame of
referencethe view of the Chicano experience as essentially homoge-
neous, with most Mexican Americans following a single stereotyped
historical pattern. Instead, the teacher should adopt a third exploratory
conceptthe great internal diversity of the Chicano experience and the
Chicano people.
,
In applying this concept, an almost unlimited number of questions
can be devised. Let me suggest a few which could prove useful in
probing Chicano diversity. For example, what aspects of the Chicano
experience are essentially Spanish, Mexican Indian, Native American,
Black, American (U.S.), or simply variations of universal human experi-
ence (for when we go beyond ethnic categories, all people have co-
,participated in such universal experiences as fear, love, hunger, cold,
heat, and hope)? What haVe been the geographical variations in the
Chicano experiencebetween regions, states, sections of states, cities, or
1
t


[Page 207]
"What have been the differences in experience of different generations ...?"
barrios' What have been the comparative experiences of various Mexi-
can immigration waves? What have been the differences in experience of
different generations of Chicanos? What have been the varieties of
urban and rural experience? What have been the experience differences
of various Chicano social classes, economic groups, political groupings,
etc.? What have been the experience differences of Mexican-American
men and women? For that matter, what differences. in the Chicano
experience have spawned such diverse appellations as Chicano, Mexican
American, Latin American, Spanish American, Hispano, Latino, Te-
jano, California or American of Mexica, descent?
These are only a few of the questionshich may help in examining
the diversity of the Chicano experience. Not only will this line of explo-
ration lead to an awareness of the variety in the Chicano past and
present, but it will also provide an antidote to textbook and societal
stereotyping of the Mexican American.
189


[Page 208]
19uTh.ACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
History of Activity
Ironically, some of these stereotypes have developed as byproducts of
the Chicano Movement. Scholars and journalists, in jazzing up their
treatment of the Movement, have come up with such catchy but perni-
cious phrases as "the awakening Mexican American" and "the siesta is
over." These invalid, ahistorical concepts imply that, prior to the Move-
ment, the Mexican American had been taking a century-long siesta and
is now just emerging from more than a century of somnolence and
passivity. Nothing could be further from the truth.
There are many sources for this misconception. For one thing, even
more than the Black and Native American, the Chicano has lacked
national visibility. As America's true "invisible man," he has failed to
gain admission into traditional narratives of the U.S. past. Therefore,
when the Chicano Movement forced the nation to notice its se:ond
largest ethnic minority, many writers treated the Movement as a devi-
ancy in Mexican-American histotya sudden shift from passivity to
activity.
In part, too, the historical myth of Chicano passivity has been rein-
forced by the recent flood of scholarly and journalistic accounts of
Anglo, prejudice against, discrimination against, and exploitation of
ethnic minority groups. These are certainly major verities of U.S. his-
tory. However, the preponderance of books and Li-tides about Anglo
activity toward (usually against) Chicanos as contrasted with the few
studies of Chicano activity itself has unfortunately produced the dis-
torted impression of the Chicano experience as an essentially passive
one, with the Chicano merely the passive recipient of Anglo discrimina-
tion and exploitation.
But the reality of*Chicano-Anglo relations belies this. Since the 1846
conquest, Chicanos have established a long activist heritage of resistance
against Anglo discrimination and exploitation." Therefore, in examining
Chicano-Anglo relations (and they should be examined in social studies
classes), the teacher must avoid the trap of using a simple active Anglo
(exploiter-discriminator) and passive Chicano (exploited-discriminated
against) model.
Moreover, although discrimination, exploitatir n, and resistance are
essential aspects of the Chicano experience, they comprise only part of
it. These themes should not be permitted to monopolize the study of the
Mexican-American past. The Chicano experience is a unique composite
of a vast variety of human activities. By using the "history of activity"
exploratory concept, teachers can help eradicate the distortions pro-
duced by the purveyors of "the awakening Mexican American" and "the
siesta is over" image.


[Page 209]
Teaching the Chicano Experience191
The Chicano People
Finally, while applying the "history of activity" concept, the social
studies teacher must avoid the limitations of still another commonly
used but distorting frame of referencethe attempt 'to explain theChi-
cano experience simply by presenting aparade of Mexican heroes and
individual Mexican-American success stories. Certainly heroes and suc-
cess stories comprise part of the Chicanoexperience. Chicanos can
develop greater pride and non-Chicanos can develop greater respect by
learning of Chicano lawyers, doctors, educators, athletes, musicians,
artists, writers, businessmen, etc., as well as Mexican and Chicano
heroes (heroes either to their own culture or to the nation at large).
However, the teaching of the Chicano experience often becomes little
more than the display of Emiliano Zapata, PanchoVilla, Benito Juarez,
and Miguel Hidalgo posters or an extended exercise in "me too -ism "
the listing of Mexican Americans who have "made it" according to
Anglo standards.
In falling into these educational clichs, the very essence of theChi-
cano experience is overlooked. For this essenceis neither heroes nor
"hie too" success stories, but rather the masses of Mexican-American
people. The social studies teacher should focus on these Chicanos,their
way of life, their activities, their culture, theirjoys and sufferings, their
conflicts, and their adaptation to an often hostile societal environment.
Such an examination of the lives of Mexican Americansnot Chicano
heroes or "successes"can provide new dimensions for the understand-
ing of and sensitivity to this important part of our nation's heritage.


[Page 210]
192TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Teaching Strategies
So much for exploratory concepts. But what of specific teaching
strategies for implementing these concepts? Many of the strategies al-
ready developed in social studies education are applicableor adaptable
to the Mexican American. However, in view of the obstacles and explor-
atory concepts I have discussed, let me suggest three teaching strategies
which are particularly useful for studying the Chicano experience:
(1) the critical analysis, from a Chicano perspective, of social studies textbooks
and other image-creating (often stereotype- or prejudice-creating) elements
of our society,
(2) the selective use of Mexican-American supplementary Materials, and
(3) the constant use of local community resources, with a strong emphasison
oral investigation.
Critical Analysis
As I discussed earlier, the ethnocentrism of our social studies telt-
books is a- major obstacle to understanding the Chicano experience.
However, the teacher can mitigate the negative impact of these text-
books and even make effective use of their cultural biases and distor-
tions.
Young students cannot be expected to have the knowledgeor critical
facility to analyze fully or erect effective defenses against the inherent
cultural deficiencies and biases in our social studies textbooks. Teachers
provide the main and possibly only line of defense between these distor-
tions and students' developing minds. After carefully analyzing books to
be used in the classroom, teachers should present them to their students
in proper perspective, indicating the ethnic biasesincluding how the
book may reaffirm Anglo superiority and neglect or distort the roleor
image of the Mexican American. Going one step further, teachers
should help students learn to identify ankanalyze cultural distortions in
textbooks and encourage them to use this critical thinking with alltext
materials, including such supposedly objective supplementary worksas
almanacs, atlases, encyclopedias, and dictionaries?'
Moving beyond these standard materials, teachers should have stu-
dents apply a Chicano perspective (as part of a multi-ethnic perspective)
in analyzing other societal elements which create images (including
stereotypes) and ideas (including prejudice). Motion pictures, comic
strips, advertisements, speeches, newspaper and magazine articles, offi-
cial government publications, and all types of books provide fineraw
material for students to use in studying anti-Chicano biases whichper-
vade society. In short, the teaching of critical analysis, particularly
involving the development of sensitivity to ethnic and culturalnuances,
should become an intrinsic part of social studies education.


[Page 211]
Teaching the Chicano Experience193
Chicano Supplementary Materials
Considering the deficiencies of social studies textbooks in relation to
the Mexican American, the teacher must also adopt a second teaching
strategythe selective use of Chicano supplementary materials. The
current Chicano Renaissance has produced a sudden affluence in Chi-
cano poetry, short stories, essays, novels, art, manifestoes, and plans."
Chicano magazines and newspapersmany cooperating through the
Chicano Press Associationhave increased rapidly in number and geo-
graphical distribution. Chicano scholarly journals now provide a forum
for research results and intellectual debate over subjects. vital to the
Mexican-American people." A small number of Movement films" and
movies treating history from a Chicano perspective" are now available.
When used effectively by the social studies teacher, these varied materi-
als should prove stimulating and enlightening in the examination of the
Chicano experience.
In addition, teachers can select from a number of recently published
elementary and secondary school supplementary works on the Mexican
American. The prolific and imaginative Rodolfo Amnia has written
three fine books: The Story of the Mexican Americans: The Men and
the Land (lower elementary), Cultures in Conflict (advanced elemen-
tary), and A Mexican American Chronicle (secondary)." Also available
for elementary grades are South by Southwest: The Mexican-American
and His Heritage by John Tebbel and Raman Eduardo Ruiz, Mexican
Americans: Past, Present, and Future by Julian Nava, and The Mexican
American: His Life Across Four Centuries by Gilbert Martinez and
Jane Edwards." Despite its title, the Tebbel-Ruiz book is more "His
Heritage" (105 pages on Mexican history and Mexican-U.S. relations)
than "The Mexican American" (15 pages). Nava's book suffers from
factual errors, an overemphasis on the Spanish aspects of the Mexican-
American heritage (to the detriment of Indian, Mexican, mestizo, and
African elements of the Chicano experience), and a failure to discuss the
Chicano Movement." For the advanced elementary or secondary level,
The Mexican-American in the United States by Charles J. and Patricia
L. Bustamante is a useful alternative to A Mexican American Chroni-
cle,29 which has proven too difficult for some high school students.
Use of Local Community Resources
But these supplementary materials notwithstanding, effective teaching
of the Chicano experience requires expanding the classroom beyond
four walls. The use of general Chicano books, magazines, journals,
articles, films, art, and ephemera must be complemented by student
discovery of Mexican-American heritage at the local level. Particularly


[Page 212]
194TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
in the Southwest, but increasingly in other sections of the country,
potential materials are all around, including the richestresource of all
the Mexican-American people.
Students can explore their local communities to obtain informationon
the Chicano experience. Newspapers, city council and school board
minutes, and records of such organizations as local clubs, churches,
Mexican-American chambers of commerce, benevolent societies, and
community settlement houses are all potential sources. However, since
the Mexican American generally has been neglected in local books,
newspapers, and other written sources, only the fringe of his experience
can be discovered through reading. This study process must be supple-
mented by oral investigation if students are to developa true knowledge
and understanding of local Mexican-American society, culture, and
history."
Every Mexican American is a potentially valuablesource of knowl-
edge. There are no class, caste, educational,or linguistic qualifications
for being a part of history, having a culture or society, having familyor
barrio traditions, perceiving the surrounding community,or relating
one's experiences. Ideally, .every Mexican American should have the
opportunity to tell and record his own story and that of his family and
friendshis personal contribution to the documenting of the Chicano
experience.
The teacher can use various means to involve the student in the
process of oral exploration. For example, each student may be assigned
to write the biography of a local Mexican-American individualor fam-
ily, including his own. The assignment may providesome non-Chicano
students with their first personal contact with Mexican-American life.
By hearing history and obtaining a perspectiveon society as viewed,
recalled, and repeated by Mexican Americans, non-Chicano students
should obtain a new outlook on the American past and the community
around them. For Mexican-American students, the assignmentcan have
a doubpayoff. First, it can help them discover a personalsense of
historicity based on their own families' past,as contrasted to the gener-
alized experience presented in books. Second, itcan contribute to family
pride. As parents and other relatives relate their stories to students, they
should become increasingly aware that they are a meaningful part ofour
nation's heritage, a part worth being studied and recorded.
Or the teacher may bring local Mexican-American residents intothe
classroom. Here they can share their experiences and views with the
students, relate their oral traditions, answer questions, givenew outlooks
on society and history, and open doors of investigation for students.
Using these family biographies and classroom interviewsas basic
data, students can test hypotheses, reevaluate previous conceptions(or


[Page 213]
"^a.4,4044.,40
..5t"4,A
'<4r"N'41*.r,4.&14704,,,,,RT4'4V,rN41.
;4414"et4,,,
4,400
.4
1,1%kitsi
'
,*
4)4,4,4h,44
444
TO1114,::
'111,
;I:T1,771?"


[Page 214]
196TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
misconceptions), and develop new generalizations on the Chicano expe-
rience. Moreover, this process of oral investigation can give students of
all ethnic backgiounds a firsthand, localized awareness of and sensitivity
to the varieties of cultures in our country. It can open intellectual doors
for them, stimulate within them a desire to continue their study of the
local community, and, by revealing the community's past and present
problems and possibilities, create the commitment to resolve these prob-
lems and fulfill the possibilities. Finally, it can "humanize" the study of
the Chicano experience by revealing on a personal and affective level
what students might never be able to discover in books.
The study of the Chicano experience offers both challenge and c ppor-
tunity to the social studies teacher. Obstacles may be frustrating, new
concepts may be demanding, and innovation may be difficult. But more
difficult, yet, have been thelives of Mexican Americans for the past 125
years. America is finally recognizing the Chicano presence, and educa-
tors are finally recognizing that the study of the Chicano experience is a
vital part of becoming aware of our nation's multi-ethnic and culturally
pluralistic heritage. It is up to the social studies teacher to turn this
overdue societal recognition into educational reality and thereby help
create an open society of the future.
FOOTNOTES
' Prior to the admission of Texas, the Mexican-American population consisted of a
handful of Mexican immigrants into the U.S.
'In this chapter, I use the words "Chicano" and "Mexican American" interchangeably,
except when referring to the Chicano Movement.
' The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo is must reading for anyone interested in the Chicano
experience. The most useful edition of the treaty is the annotated version published by the
Tate Gallery in Truchas, New Mexico.
' Not until 1970 did the Census Bureau include Mexican Americans as a population
category. The Chicano population prior,to 1970 can only be "guesstimated" on the basis of
such occasionally used census categories as persons of Mexican birth, persons of the
Mexican "race," persons of Spanish mother tongue, and white persons of Spanish sur-
name. These categories were further limited in value by not being applied nationally, but
only to selected states, particularly in the Southwest. Even the 1970 census has come under
severe criticism because the Chicano and Puerto Rican categories were not included on the
short form which went to everybody, but only on the long form which went to a 5 per cent
random sample. A discussion of Chicano "census history" can be found in the Census
Bureau's publication, Persons of Spanish Surname.
' Although Chicanos are most numerous in the Southwest, they are rapidly increasing in
number throughout the rest of the country. For example, Michigan now has the nation's
fourth largest Chicano population, while a quarter-of-a-million Mexican Americans live in
Chicago alone.


[Page 215]
Teaching the Chicano Experience197
For convenience, 1 use the term "American" in referring to the United States. How-
ever, it should be remembered that, strictly speaking, this term applies to all nations and
inhabitants of the Western hemisphere.
' For a history of the development of the Black Legend, see Philip Wayne Powell, Tree
of Hate: Propaganda and Prejudices Affecting United States Relations with the Hispanic
World (New York: Basic Books, 1971). In particular, pages 131-44 contain a discussion of
the Black Legend's impact on U.S. education.
' For an analysis of English and Colonial. U.S. attitudes toward Native Americans, see
Roy Harvey Pearce, The- Savages of America: A Study of the Indian and the Idea of
Civilization (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, !953). The classic study of English-Anglo
attitudes toward people of color is Winthrop Jordan, White Over Black: American Atti-
tudes toward the Negro, 1550-1817 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
[1968D. Although Jordan focuses on White-Black attitudinal relations, his book has serious
implications for the history of Anglo-Chicano relations.
'Americo Paredes presents a slight variation on this theme. In summarizing one of the
elements of the Anglo-Texas anti-Mexican legend, Paredes writes that Anglo-Texans
traditionally assumed that "The degeneracy of the Mexican is due to his mixed blood,
though the elements in the mixture were inferior to begin with. He is descended from the
Spaniard, a second-rate type of European, and from the equally substandard Indian of
Mexico, who must not be confused with the noble savages of North America." See
Americo Paredes, "With His Pistol in His Hand:" A Border Ballad and Its Hero (Austin:
Univeisity of Texas Press [1958)), p. 16.
"Cecil Robinson, With the Ears of Stra.The Mexican in American Literature
(Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1963), pp. 15-30.
"Thomas M. Martinez, "Advertising and Racism: The Case of the Mexican-American,"
El Grito, 11 (Summer, 1969), 3-13.
" For a more complete discussion of the Mexican Image in the mass media, see Carlos
E. Cortes, "Revising the 'All-American Soul Course': A Bicultural Avenue to Educational
Reform" in Alfredo Castaiieda, Manuel Ramirez III, Carlos E Cortes, and Mario Barrera
(eds.), Mexican Americans and Educational Change (Riverside: Mexican-American Stud-
ies Program, University of California, 1971), pp. 319-22.
" Ibid., pp. 318-19.
"The most intensive multi-ethnic analyses of current social studies textbooks are Report
and Recommendations of the Task Force to Reevaluate Social Science Textbooks Grades
Five Through Eight (Sacramento: Bureau of Textbooks, California State Department of
Education, 1971), and A Study of Elementary & Secondary Social Studies Textbooks
(Lansing: Michigan Department of Education, 1973).
"Michael B. Kane, Minorities in Textbooks: A Study of Their Treatment in Social
Studies Texts (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1970).
"Warren J. Halliburton and William Loren Katz, American Majorities and Minorities:
A Syllabus of United States History for Secondary Schools (New York: Arno Press, 1970).
"Among these relatively well-researched topics are Hispano-Mexican Colonial South-
western institutions, the Texas Revolution, the U.S.-Mexican War, the Hispano-Mexican
land grant question, the Mexican Revolution, and the contemporary Mexican-American
scene.
"Among the more useful bibliographies on the Chicano experience are Luis G. Nogales
(ed.), The Mexican American: A Selected and Annotated Bibliography (2d ed. rev.;
Stanford, Calif.: Center for Latin American Studies, Stanford University, 1971); Ernie
Barrios (ed.), Bibliografla a de Azdan: An Annotated Chicano Bibliography (San Diego:
Centro de Estudios Chicanos, San Diego State College, 1971); Ruben Cortez and Joseph
Navarro (eds.), Mexican-American History: A Critical Selective Bibliography (Santa
Barbara, Calif.: Mexican-American Historical Society, 1969).
"The classical champion of studying the American past on a two-directional basiswas
Herbert Eugene Bolton. A 'discussion of the Bolton Theory can be found in Lewis Henke
(ed.), Do the Americas Have a Common History? A Critique of the Bolton Theory (New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1964).
Two books which explore aspects of this resistance heritage are Rodolfo Acuila,


[Page 216]
198TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Occupied America: The Chicano's Struggle for Liberation (San Francisco: CanfieldPress,
1972) and Carlos E. Cortes, Struggle for Aztlin: A History of Chicano Resistance (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Co.). Forthcoming.
" The California Task Force Report and Michigan Department of EducationStudy (see
footnote 14) should prove most useful in developing this teaching strategy.
" In Mexican and Chicano tradition, a plan is a manifesto of goals and grievances,
issued by groups or individuals upon initiating a social or political movement.
" Among the more important Chicano scholarly journals are Aztlin: ChicanoJournal of
the Social Sciences and the Arts (Chicano Cultural Center, University of California,Los
Angeles); El Orito: A Journal of Contempoiary Mexican-American Thought(Quinto Sol
Publications, Berkeley, Calif.); The Journal of Mexican American History (Santa Barbara,
Calif.); The Journal of Mexican American Studies (Anaheim, Calif.).
" Such as /am Joaquin and Tijerina.
"Such as North from Mexico: Exploration and Heritage and Northwest from Tuma-
cricori.
"Rudolph Acuiia, The Story of the Mexican American: The Men and the Land (New
York: American Book Company, 1969), Cultures in Conflict (with PeggyShackelton) (Los
Angeles: Charter School Books, 1970), and A Mexican AmericanChronicle (New York:
American Book Company, 1971).
" John Tebbe! and Ramon Eduardo Ruiz, South by Southwest: The Mexican-American
and His Heritage (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Company, 1969), JulianNava,
Mexican Americans: Past, Present, and Future (New York: American BookCompany,
1969), and Gilbert Martinez and Jane Edwards, The Mexican American: His Life Across
Four Centuries (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973).
"The author has indicated to me that he hopes to revise and update the book.
"Charles J. Bustamante and Patricia L. Bustamante, The Mexican-American in the
United States (Mountain View, Calif.: PATTY-LAR Publications; 1969).
*For a more extensive discussion of the use of community resources, seeCarlos E.
Cortes, "CHICOP: A .Response to the Challenge of Local Chicano History," Aztlan.
Chicano Journal of the Social Sciences and the Arts, I (Fall, 1970), 1-14. An exampleof
comparative Chicano community history is the forthcoming Carlos E. Cortes (editor and
coordinator), John Faragher, Donald Miller, Robert Pinger, Susan Pinger, Lorenza Cal-
villo Schmidt, Carolyn Symonds, and Paul Viafora, The Benr Cross: A Historyof the
Mexican American in the San Bernardino Valley.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Actfia, Rodolfo. Occupied America: The Chicano's Struggle toward Liberation. San
Francisco: Canfield Press, 1972. Strongly-worded interpretation of the Chicano experi-
ence employing a framework of historical internal colonialism.
Burma, John H. (ed.). Mexican-Americans in the United States. Cambridge, Mass.:
Schenkman Publishing Company, 1970. Motley collection of articles on the recent
Chicano experience.
Carter, Thomas P. Mexican Americans in School: A History of Educational Neglect. New
York: College Entrance Examination Board, 1970. Pioneering study of the failure ofthe
U.S. educational system in relation to Chicanos.
Castafieda, Alfredo; Ramirez, Manuel, Ill; Cortes, Carlos E; and Barrera, Mario (eds.).
Mexican Americans and Educational Change. Riverside: Mexican-AmericanStudies
Program, University of California, 1971. Major collection of articles on bilingual-bicul-
tural education and the history and politics of educational change.
Gamio, Manuel. Mexican Immigration to the United States. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1930. Dated but basic study of Mexican immigration.


[Page 217]
Teaching the Chicano Experience199
Grebler, Leo; Moore, Joan W.; and Guzman, Ralph C. The Mexican-American People:
The Nation's Second Largest Minority. New York: The Free Press, 1970. Massive
compilation of information and statistics on the Mexican American, presented from an
assimilationist perspective.
Ludwig, Ed and Santibafiez, Jimes (eds.). The Chicanos: Mexican American Voices.
Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1971. Interesting collection of essays, fiction, and poetry by
Chicanos about Chicanos.
McWilliams, Carey. North from Mexico: The Spanish-Speaking People of the United
States. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1949. Sensitive, poetic, although occasionally
inaccurate history of the Mexican American, which must be read by all persons inter-
ested in the Chicano experience.
Meier, Matt S. and Rivera, Feliciano. The Chicanos: A History of Mexican Americans.
New York: Hill and Wang, 1972. Pedestrian, uneven, but useful general history of the
Mexican American.
Meinig, D.W. Southwest: Three Peoples in Geographical Change. 1600-1970. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1971. Perceptive study of Chicano, Mexican, Native American,
and Anglo interaction in New Mexico and Arizona.
Moore, Joan W., with Cuellar, Alfredo. Mexican Americans. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.:
Prentice-Hall, 1970. Good short introductory work on the Mexican American.
Moquin, Wayne, with Van Doren, Charles (eds.). A Documentary History of the Mexican
Americans. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1971. Useful collection of primary and
secondary source materials on the Chicano experience.
Pitt, Leonard. Decline of the Californios: A Social History of the Spanish-Speaking
Californians, 1846-1890. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Study of the
tribulations suffered by Mexican Americans following the U.S.-Mexican War.
Rendon, Armando B. Chicano Manifesto. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971.
Rhetorical but important expression of the content and spirit of the Chicano Movement.
Robinson, Cecil: With the Ears of Strangers: The Mexican in American Literature.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1963. Revealing analysis of American portrayals
of the Mexican, with an emphasis on the nineteenth century.
Romano-V, Octavio 1. (ed.). El EspejoThe Mirror: Selected Mexican-American Litera-
ture. Berkeley, Calif.: Quinto Sol Publications, 1969. Good examples of poetry, essays,
and short stories produced by the Chicano Renaissance.
Samora, Julian (ed.). La Raza: Forgotten Americans. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1966. Uneven but informative collection of articles on various
aspects of the Chicano experience.
Steiner, Stan. La Raza: The Mexican Americans. New York: Harper & Row, 1969.
Panoramic view of the Chicano Movement and the contemporary Mexican-American
scene.


[Page 218]
Jack D. Forbes
JACK D. FORBES is Professor of Native American Studies at the
University of California, Davis and an Instructor at D-Q University. He
has taught at the University of Southern California, Citrus College, San
Fernando Valley State College, the University of Nevada, and has held
research fellowships from the Social Science Research Council and the
John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. Dr. Forbes has written
extensively on Native American Studies, ethnohistory, and interethnic
relations and is himself of Powhatan Indian descent. His articles have
appeared in such journals as Phylon, Southwest Journal of Anthropol-
ogy, American West, Journal of the West, Journal of Human Relations
and Ethnohistory. His books include Apache, Navaho and Spaniard,
The Indian in America's Past, Warriors of the Colorado: The Yumas of
the Quechan Nation and Their Neighbors, Mexican-Americans: A
Handbook for Educators, Nevada Indians Speak, Education of the
Culturally Different: A Multi-Cultural Approach, Native Americans of
California and Nevada: A Handbook for Educators and Afro-Ameri-
cans in the Far West: A Handbook for Educators.
200


[Page 219]
1
JACK D. FORBES
Teaching Native American
Values and Cultures
No school can be truly "American" (havinga character which is rele-
vant to the history of this land) unless a rather significant part of its
curriculum focuses on the Native American (American Indian) heritage.
For at least 20,000 years the development and maintenance of this land
was entirely in the hands of Native Americans. For the past 500years
Europeans, Africans, and Asians have also becomea part of the Ameri-
can scene, but the Native has remained an important factor everywhere,
especially in the Western half of the country. Only in thepast century or
so have people of the white race become a majority anywhere in the
West.
.
Our schools, by and large, are not "American." Because of the politi-
cal power of the Anglo (English-speaking white) ethnicgroup, the
schools have assumed a European character, focusing entirelyor pre-
dominantly upon the culture and legacy of Anglo-Americans. Ofcourse,
that culture has been greatly influenced by non-European peoples(in-
cluding Indians) but the "mestizo" (hybrid) character of Anglo-Ameri-
can culture is seldom recognized, especially in the school curriculum.
The fact that white heroes such as Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett,and
Kit Carson were highly Indianized persons interms of dress, life-style,
and, to some degree, values, is overlooked. Instead, allof their Indian
attributes simply are "appropriated" into white cultureso that the pupil
has no knowledge of the culturally "mestizo"status of such persons. The
whole subject of cultural mestisaje (mixture), so widely discussedin
South America, is not even acknowledged in Anglo schools.It, along
with its companion subject, racial mixture,seems to be a "taboo" topic.
201


[Page 220]
202TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
In order for our schools to be "American" they must become "Ameri-
canized." They must be consciously shorn of their alien European qual-
ity and must come to reflect the realities of this land's past. But it is not
enough to say that little bits and pieces of Native American life and
culture should be integrated into the curriculum. On the contrary, we
must be sure that the essence, the deepest meaning. of Indian life-ways
are dealt with. All too often curriculum-builders have felt that by look-
ing at a few baskets in the third grade, or by having children examine
different housing-styles, they could adequately dispose of Native culture.
It should be borne in mind, however, that the essence of Indianness has
next to nothing to do with canoes, moccasins or other material objects.
A modern-day Native American can drive a pickup truck and fly in a jet
airplane and still be a full participant in the central "core" of Native
culture.
The meaning or significance of the Native American way of life
basically revolves around values and it is this subject-area which should
dominate curriculum-building. This is not to say that Native American
cooking, dancing, music, and art should be ignored, but rather that
stress should be placed upon the central dynamic lan of Native cul-
tures. It is because of this elan that Native peoples are able to produce
the arts, crafts, music, and poetry so admired by outsiders. Not only is
the study of the basic values of Native American life important as a
means of understanding Native cultures themselves, but these values
(and the socio-cultural, religio-philosophical, and political behavior-
styles resulting therefrom) are significant because they provide a means
for solving many of the significant problems faced by modern man.
It is a tragedy that modern United States society seems to be tearing
itself apart over such issues as protecting the environment, crime, drugs,
dishonesty in government, poverty, unrepresentative government, over-
population, uncontrolled technology, exploitation of other human be-
ings, overseas imperialism, and growing militarism. The tragic nature of
this situation is accentuated by the fact that Native American philoso-
phy and culture possesses solutions for all of these problems, or at least
has systems of behavior which would have prevented them from ever
arising. One of the reasons why the white society is proceeding so
rapidly in the direction of its own destruction is that the accumulated
wisdom of 20,000 years of living on this land called America has been
consciously excluded from the schools and colleges.
There are many reasons why the schools have excluded any discussion
of the basic values of Native cultures: first, because of a white racist
superiority complex which asserts that non-white cultures have nothing
worthwhile to offer; second, because the ruling classes of the United
States have sought to encourage an aggressive, exploitative approach to


[Page 221]
ii
kill-11111
A. A
r
"... we must be sure that the essence, the deepest meaning,of Indian life-ways are
dealt with."


[Page 222]
"Education should emphasize the perfection of individual character, that is, the
development of a person functioning in a harmonious way with nature and with
people ..."


[Page 223]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures205
life (which is directly contradicted by Native values); and, third, because
e.:
Native economic, social, and political democracy and respect for all
living creatures is antithetical to the industrial capitalistic system as
developed in the United States. What are these Native values? As an
introduction, let us look at the subject from the perspective of a set of
goals of education written from the Native American viewpoint.
i
(1) The survival and development of the people (the tribe or nation) isgener-
ally a paramount goal. Educational programs must contribute to the con-y,
tinued existence of the nation.
(2) An individual is "successful" in life insofar as he acquires the respect and
esteem of his people. Educational programs must emphasize the acquisition
of skills and development of personality characteristics valued by the
particular Indian society.
(3) Education should emphasize the perfection of individual character, that is,
the development of a person functioning in a harmonious way withnature
and with people and one who seeks to perfect his own potential to the
highest degree possible in the various spheres of life (in art, music, bodily
development, crafts, the acquisition of knowledge, religious experience,or
whatever). The emphasis is on life-long development and on attitude, and
not merely on the acquisition of certain marketable skills coupled with a
little random exposure to "general education" or the "humanities."
(4) The individual should be educated for personal strength and survival, that
is, the ability to be alone for long periods of time, if necessary, without
being either bored or fearful. In other words, the individual should be able
to turn inward without being frightened by internal nothingness, should be
able to be apart from other people without becoming "insane" or "queer,"
should possess the basic skills for functioning alone so as to know that
survival is possible. (This does not mean that individuals are to be trained
to be self-centered, but rather that they are able to relate equally well to the
human and non-human worlds.)
(5) The individual should develop a profound conception of the unity of life,
from the fact of his belonging to a community of related people to which he
owes his existence and definition of being, to the total web of natural life,
to which he and his people also owe their existence. The brotherhood of all
living creatures must be existentially comprehended, along with the realiza-
tion of one's origin from the earth and so-called non-living elements.
(6) The individual should develop a realization that "success" in life stems
from being able to contribute to the well-being of one's people and all life.
This means that the individual seeks to perfect behavior and skills which
will add "beauty" to the world. To create "beauty" in actions, words, and
objects is the overall objective of Liman beings in this world.


[Page 224]
206TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
(7)The educational process must emphasize the development of an attitude of
profound respect for the individuality and right to self-realization of all
living creatures. What this means is that Indian people do not impose their
wills on other Indians, do not interrupt other people when they arespeak-
ing, do not try to change other people's behavior except by example or
indirect ways, do not attempt to use other people as "means," do not take
advantage of, or exploit, other people, and do not try to impose any
,collective decisions on individuals except where the survival of the whole
people is at stake. Even then, the dissenting individuals are subject to no
more severe coercion than schism, i.e., goingtheir own way.
(8) The individual should be encouraged to share with othersand to show
hospitality. The hoarding of possessions is an antisocial trait whichis
counter-productive since it initiates a vicious circle of hoarding. Also,
hoarding is based upon an erroneous belief in the ultimate value of mate-
rial possessions and a perverted conception of man'srelationship to the
universe.
(9)The individual must be helped to understand that material possessions are
valuable primarily for the joy derived from sharing them with others, and
that spiritual and character development are what is important. Likewise, a
truly creative person (i.e., a craftsman) can continually create beauty and
does not need to "own" it. In fact, the craftsman must realize that his skill
and "talent" are derived from others (his "teachers") or from the nature of
the creative process from which he originated and that heonly gives
concrete expression to that process.
(10) The individual should be helped to realize that the world of sense percep-
tion is not the only level of existence and that the eternal nature of the
universe must be considered. Such Indian viewpoints such as thatthe
empirical world is a place for giving expression to the self-realization
process of the Great Mystery (the core of reality),but is not of intrinsic
value when considered by itself, need to be understood.'
The above goals are, of course, general and do not relate specifically
to any single Indian group. They do, however, probably reflect the basic
values of Native societies. Quite obviously, persons raised according to
traditional Native values would (and do) behave differently from many
people in the dominant society. Generally speaking, a Native American
community will be (1) extremely democratic, (2) very tolerant of individ-
ual differences, (3) very equalitarian, (4) typified by an absence of wealth
concentrated in any particular family, (5) uninterested in technology if
the latter threatens any basic values or offers no significant improvement
in the quality of life, (6) typified by giving a low value to the possession
of most material goods, (7) typified by a deep commitment to the
spiritual life, (8) opposed to the unnecessary destruction of any living


[Page 225]
I
;
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures207
creature, (9) opposed to the unnecessary alteration or destruction of the
earth or any part of the earth, (10) uninterested in warfareor scheming
related to acquiring control over another group (i.e., imperialism), and
(I I) extremely oriented towards bringing forth "beauty" bymeans of
arts, crafts, music, prayer, ceremony, and proper living.
It should be crystal clear that such a community representsa radical
alternative to existing white cities and towns. In spite of rhetoric, the
usual white town is typified by gross inequality of wealth, political
dominance by wealthy elites and corporations, an absence of significant
sharing and hospitality, very little concern for spirituality, littleconcern
for the earth and non-human living creatures, noticeable intolerance
directed towards non-conformists, laws or rules designed to punish
people for matters of a purely individual nature (such as the length of
hair of a teen-age boy), and, of course, by a great deal of aggressive,
violent behavior. People tend to be concerned with the acquisition of
wealth and power rather than with character-development and radiating
"beauty."
The environmental-social crisis faced by the United Statesstems
directly from the "logic" of the values and goals of white society.
Therefore, it is crucial that alternative value systems be studiedso as to
provide the youth of today with options for the future. The advantage of
studying Native American values stems from the fact that theyare
neither "utopian" nor theoretical. They have been, and are, the actual
values of living peoples who have tested and perfected themover thou-
sands of years. Let us now take a brief look at specific evidence of
Indian values and how they relate to behavior.
Many centuries ago White Buffalo Woman gave to the Lakota (Sioux)
people a sacred pipe and a small round stone. She said:
With this sacred pipe you will walk upon the Earth; for the Earth isyour
Grandmother and Mother, :::::, 5ne is sacred. Every step that is takenupon
Her should be as a prayer. The bowl of this pipe is of red stone; it is the Earth.
Carved in the stone and facing the center is this buffalo calf who represents all
the four-leggeds who live upon your Mother. The stem of the pipe is of wood,
and this represents all that grows upon the Earth. And those twelve feathers
which hang here where the stem fits into the bowl are from Wanbli Galeshka,
the Spotted Eagle, and they represent the eagle and all the winged of the air.
All these peoples, and all the things of the universe, are joined toyou who
smoke the pipeall send their voices to Wakan-Tanka, the Great Spirit.
When you pray with this pipe, you pray for and with everything.
With this pipe you will be bound to all your relatives: your Grandfather and
Father, your Grandmother and Mother. This round rock, which is made of
the same red stone as the bowl of the pipe, your Father Wakan-Tanka has
also given to you. It is the Earth, your Grandmother and Mother, and it is
where you will live and increase. This Earth which He has given to you is red,
1


[Page 226]
=
"...all forms of life are our brothers and sisters and have to be respected."
and the two-leggeds who live upon the Earth are red; and the Great Spirit has
also given to you a red day, and a red road [the good, straight road of purity
and life]. All of this is sacred and so do not forget! Every dawn as it comes is a
holy event, and every day is holy, for the light comes from your Father
Wakan-Tanka; and also you must always remember that the two-leggeds and
all other peoples who stand upon the Earth are sacred and should be treated as
such'1
Black Elk, the great Sioux teacher, tells us also: "peace ... comes
within the souls of men when they realize their relationship, their one-
ness, with the universe and all its powers, and when they realize that at
the center of the Universe dwells Wakan-Tanka, and that this center is
really everywhere, it is within each of us.'''
Some of the implications of the above religious beliefs (which are
shared by most Indians) should be obvious. First, the Earth our Mother
is holy and should be treated as such. Second, all forms of life are our
brothers and sisters and have to be respected. Third, Life itself is a holy,
sacred experience. Fourth, we must live our livesas religion,that is, with
constant concern for spiritual relationships and values. Fifth, we must
208


[Page 227]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures209
live lives that bring forth both physical and spiritual "beauty." All life
has the potentiality of bringing forth Beauty and Harmony, but man in
particular has also the ability to bring forth ugliness and disharmony.
The true testing of man is, however, to overcome sickness and evil by
giving voice to thoughts of Beauty, as in this Navajo prayer:
Tsegihi.
House made of dawn.
House made of evening light.
House made of the dark cloud.
House made of male rain.
House made of dark mist.
House made of female rain.
House made of pollen.
House made of grasshoppers.
Dark cloud is at the door.
The trail out of it is dark cloud.
The zigzag lightning stands high upon it.
Male deity!
Your offering I make.
I have prepared a smoke for you.
Restore my feet for me.
Restore my legs for me.
Restore my body for me.
Restore my mind for me.
This very day take out your spell for me.
Your spell remove for me.
You have taken it away for me.
Far off it has gone.
Happily I go forth.
My interior feeling cool, may I walk.
No longer sore, may I walk.
Impervious to pain, may I walk.
With lively feelings may I walk.
As it used to be long ago, may I walk.
Happily may I walk.
Happily, with abundant dark clouds, may I walk.
Happily, with abundant showers, may I walk.
Happily, on the trail of pollen, may I walk.
Happily may I walk.
Being as it used to be long ago, may I walk.
May it be beautiful behind me.
May it be beautiful before me.
May it be beautiful below me.
May it be beautiful above me.
May it be beautiful all around me.
In beauty it is finished'
I


[Page 228]
210 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
From the Native viewpoint, every blade of grass, every four-legged
brother, every two-legged brother, every element of the Earth, and of the
Air, and of the Waterall living thingsseek to realize their fullest
potential. An acorn seeks to explode and send forth roots and a stem, to
grow into as mighty an oak as it can be. An acorn has "power," theonly
real "power," the ability to grow into what it should be. The Universe,
the Creator, is like an acorn. It is "power exploding forth," it is "power
yet unborn," it is "power going back into itself." A human being is like
an acorn, except that a human not only has the "power" to grow in body
but also has the "power" to develop other potentiality, such as in
creating beauty, in doing great things, in learning about the Unseen
World, and in many other ways. All life, but especially humans, have the
ability to serve as the means whereby the Creator's dynamic potentiality
is given expression.
A person must learn how to express the potential of the Great Cre-
ative Power. To do this a person should learn skills, and learn them well:
skills that bring forth beauty, that bring forth knowledge, that bring
forth harmonious living, that bring forth things which are useful. All
these skills and others are important. A person without any skills,
without any way to give expression to the Great Spirit, is an unhappy
person, a person who is unrealized. To learn ways of doing things, and
to strive for excellence, is necessary. Here is what the Mexicans (Aztecs)
of the 1540's had to say about the attitude of the artist and craftsman
(which applies to all persons in whatever field of endeavor):
The good painter is a Toltec, an artist;
he creates with red and black ink,
with black
The good painter is wise,
God is in his heart.
He puts divinity into things;
he converses with his own heart.
He knows the colors, he applies them and shades them;
he draws feet and faces,
he puts in the shadows, he achieves perfection.
He paints the colors of all the flowers,
as if he were a Toltec.
He who gives life to clay:
his eye is keen, he molds
and kneads the clay.


[Page 229]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures211
The good potter:
he takes great pains with his work;
he teaches the clay to lie;
he converses with his heart;
he makes things live, he creates them;
he knows all, as though he were a Toltec;
he trains his hands to be skillful.
The bad potter:
careless and weak,
crippled in his art.
Juan, the Yaqui teacher, has said: "A man goes to knowledge as he
goes to war, wide awake, with fear, with respect, and with absolute
assurance.. .. For me there is only the traveling on paths that have
heart, on any path that may have heart. There I travel, and the only
worthwhile challenge is to travel its full length. And there I travel
looking, looking, breathlessly.... Try it as many times as you think
necessary. Then ask yourself, and yourself alone, one question. ... Does
this path have a heart? If it does, the path is good, if it doesn't it is of no
use. Both paths lead nowhere; but one has a heart, the other doesn't."5
And so, from the Mexican and Yaqui viewpoint, one has to seek one's
own paths of knowledge, of wisdom, of creativeness, and seek them
diligently, ever mindful of the necessity of complete dedication to realiz-
ing all of the ultimate potentiality of what is being done. Many people
have come to believe that work is something to be avoided, and espe-
cially working with or'e's hands. This is, of course, a product of the
influence of the decadent white "leisure classes" with their notions of
"upward mobility." The Mexicans had a different view, as expressed in
this Huehuetlatolli (speech of the elders):
Act! Cti wood, work. the land,
plant cactus, sow maguey;
you shall have drink, food, clothing.
With this you will stand straight.
With this you shall live.
For this you shall be spoken of, prai;ed;
in this manner you will show yourself to your parents and relatives.
Some day you shall tie yourself to a skirt and blouse.
What will she drink? What will she eat?
Is she going to live off of the air?
You are the support, the remedy;
you are the eagle, the tiger.
From Aztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Nahuatl Mind, by Miguel
Le6n-Portilla. Copyright 1963 by the University of Oklahoma Press. Used with permission.


[Page 230]
212TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
The Mexican not only valued work, but also devotion to diligent cre-
ativeness.
The artistdisciple, e.bundant, multiple, restless.
The true artist, capable, practicing, skillful,
maintains dialogue with his heart, meets things with his mind.
The true artist draws out all from his heart;
works with delight, makes things with calm, with sagacity;
works like a true Toltec; composes his objects; works dexterously, invents;
arranges materials; adorns them; makes them adjust.
The carrion artist works at random; sneers at the people;
makes things opaque; brushes across the surface of the face of things;
works without care; defrauds people, is a thief.
What was sought after was greatness of purpose, dedication to the full
realization of one's potentiality, and humility.
Those of the white hair and wrinkled faces,
our ancestors....
They did not come here to be arrogant;
they were not seeking;
they were not greedy.
They were such
that they were highly esteemed on earth;
they came to be eagles and tigers.
To work at something, and to work at it well, to contribute to the
Beauty of the world without seeking a material reward, that is the
supreme "secular" goal of Native life. To be a true Mexican! To be a
true Toltec, an artist, in whatever one does!
A society where billions must be spent each year to keep men in
prison is not free. A society where a woman cannot walk alone without
being in danger of attack is not free. A society where a man is murdered
across the street from the White House is not free. A society where "Law
and Order" comes from the barrel of a gun possesses neither "law" nor
"order" but only a balance of terror. To discover true democracy and
real freedom one must turn to traditional Indo-Chicano societies,
grounded in reverence for the Web of Life. What is a free society
actually like? Here is what Gene Weltfish says about Pawnee society in
the 1860's:
They were a well-disciplined people, maintaining public order under many
trying circumstances. And yet they had none of the power mechanisms that
we consider essential to a well-ordered life. No orders were ever issued. No
FromAztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Nahuatl Mind,by Miguel
Le6n-Portilla. Copyright 1963 by the University of Oklahoma Press. Used with permission.


[Page 231]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures213
assignments for work were ever made nor were overall plans discussed. There
was no code or rules of conduct nor punishment for infraction. There were no
commandments nor moralizing proverbs. The only instigator of action was the
consenting person.... Whatever social forms existed were carried within the
consciousness of the people, not by others who were in a position to make
demands. As I talked to the old men and women I realized that this is what we
wish for but do not have....
Gradually I began to realize that democracy is a very personal thing which,
like charity, begins at home. Basically it means not being coerced and having
no need to coerce anyone else. The Pawnee learned this way of living in the
earliest beginning of his life. In the detailed events of everyday living as a
child, he began his development as a disciplined and free man or as a woman
who felt her dignity and her independence to be inviolate.'
John Collier, COmmissioner of Indian Affairs in the 1930's and 1940's,
showed remarkable foresight when he discussed Native American soci-
eties as follows:
They had what the world has lost. They have it now. What the world has lost,
the world must have again lest it die. Not many years are left to have or have
not, to recapture the lost ingredient. ... What, in our human world, is this
power to live? It is the ancient, lost reverence and passion for human person-
ality, joined with the ancient, lost reverence and passion for the earth and its
web of life.
This indivisible reverence and passion is what the American Indian almost
universally had; and representative groups of them have it still.
If our modern world should be able to recapture this power, the earth's
natural resources and web of life would not be irrevocably wasted within the
twentieth century, which is the prospect now.
True democracy, founded in the neighborhoods and reaching over the world,
would become the realized heaven on earth. And living peacenot just an
interlude between warswould be born and would last through ages....'
The great success of Native Americans in the "art of living" can be
documented by the teacher in many ways. For example, the following
description of Native culture along the Pacific Coast illustrates one
approach to presenting Native life:
Native Californian civilization was of such a nature that at least five hundred
autonomous republics could exist within the present boundaries of California
in relative harmony and without imperialism. More significantly, in these
republics the fundamental dignity and self-rule of each individual person was
virtually universal. Can we imagine today numerous republics without armies,
living largely at peace with each other, each without police or other formal
instrument of societal coercion? Can we imagine societies bound together into
leagues covering large areas, the links consisting primarily or solely in religion
(ceremony-sharing) and kinship, with no formal "international" machinery or


[Page 232]
214 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"peace-keeping" armies? Can we understand political systems where chiefs
and leaders are powerless in a formal sense, depending upon the agreement of
the people for all major enterprises? Can we imagine systems of decision
making where all of the people are involved and where everyone has a right to
be heard even if it means that meetings drag on and on until consensus is
achieved?
There can be little question that Native Californians (and many other Native
Americans) were profoundly successful society builders, for almost all of the
individual republics were utopias from the perspective of much of classic
political and social theory, and also from the viewpoint of modern Califor-
nians alienated by mass society, big government, crime and so on.
One might well argue that democracy reached its highest stage of development
not in Greece (where, after all, most of the people were slaves or excluded
from decision making) but in Native California. Of course, it is also true that
Californian democracy was able to endure only because of certain religious
and social conditions which might be regarded as disadvantages in some
quarters.
The unfolding, creative process inherent in the Great Mystery takes the form
of at least two levels of reality, a mystical level and an ordinary day-to-diy
world of sense perception. The mystical level is one typified by an absence of
physical boundaries and an absence of linear space-time relationships. It is the
realm, as it were, of ideal forms, a realm in which all creatures can and do
participate both consciously and unconsciously. It is the realm where, by
means of dreams and visions, Indians can enter and secure direct contact with
the sources of "power" (ability and knowledge) and with the endless, cyclical
creative processes of the universe.
The day-to-day level of sense perception is generally conceived of as a less
significant, but real and necessary, part of the unfolding of the Creator. It is
the stage, as it were, for the acting out or giving expression to the "power" (or
potentiality) of the universe. For example, an Indian doctor acts out in this
world the knowledge acquired by means of a vision-experience in the mystical
realm. To put it another way, the "unconscious" of the psychologist does not
exist in a separate area of the brain, but rather is a part of a larger reality
connecting all creatures and life itself,
Native Californians, and most other Indians, were, and are, earthy,
hearty, and happy people (when among themselves) because their view
of the universe avoided dualism. They did not create a gap between the
"spiritual" and the "material" because, in their view, the "spiritual" and
the "material" are but one process of unfolding and return. This avoid-
ance of dualism is very important because it saved Indian societies from
the kind of sickness and repression which has so often typified European
groups (which tend to swing to extremes, either the extreme of "puritan-
ism" or the extreme of "hedonism," or the extreme of monastic denial or
capitalistic wealth-worship).


[Page 233]
Teaching Native Americas, Values and Cultures215
I have devoted so much space to emphasizing religious and social behavior
because Native Californian civilization must be viewed as a 15,000-year effort
to perfect the inter-human and human-creation relationships. In other words,
the Native Californians were not machine creating people, not monument
creating people, not great city creating people, but rather they were applied
philosophers, seeking not in theory but in practice to act out in their lives the
beauty and harmony of the Great Mystery.
A grasp of this perspective i essential, since Europeans have ordinarily judged
cultures solely on the basis of the size of their public monuments, the extent of
their military conquests, the amount of surplus wealth accumulated, the elabo-
ration of the material basis of life, and, of course, the numbers of slaves or
poor people being successfully exploited. The greater the degree of exploita-
tion, the greater the amount of "hard goods," the higher the ranking of the
culture in question. But Native Californian society must be measured by a
different scale, even as Jesus of Nazareth and Julius Caesar must be rated on
different bases.
In practice, Western Europeans have given lip-service to Jesus but real rever-
ence to Caesar. And as a result, California Indians were, and are, looked
down upon because they failed to carve out empires by means of bloody wars
and failed to devote their energies to building huge stone and steel monu-
ments to materialism'
This latter concept is extremely significant. All too often teachers fall
into the trap of judging people solely on the basis of the material
remains left behind, or the size of their empires. For example, the
teacher may glorify the British Empire and compare it with, say, a small
Native community, to the latter's disadvantage. But it has to be borne in
mind that the British Empire brought about the enslavement and death
of thousands from the Caribbean to India so that rich Englishmen could
spend idle days in the English countryside in "pleasant conversation"
and fox hunts.
It is significant that Indian heroes usually fall into two categories:
leaders in the defense of the homeland, or holy men (religious leaders)
and often they were both. One finds among North American Native
heroes no Alexanders the Great (conquerers), no John D. Rockefellers
(seekers after wealth), no Rudolph Valentinos (romantic entertainment
figures or actors), and no "robber barons," slave-owners, military adven-
turers, ambitious politicians, or fakers. Such Indian heroes as Crazy
Horse, Chief Joseph, Pontiac, Tecumseh, Deganawidah, Kentpuash
(Captain Jack), Geronimo, Po-pe, Handsome Lake, and Sitting Bull
were men of high character, purity of motive, and self-sacrifice, with
lifeways unmarred by the exploitation of others, by self-serving expedi-
ency, or by a lack of personal restraint.
The student can, in no way, acquire insight into the realities of Native
American life without a thorough knowledge of values. It is the Europe-


[Page 234]
an's values which lead him to behave the way he does and it is the
Indian's values which provide the mainspring for Native culture.
It should also be a primary objective of any curriculum dealing with
Indians to provide a direct understanding of the contemporary status of
Native American people. Such a need demands that adequate attention
be given to Indian history (from an Indian perspective) and to modern
realities as they really are and not as white social scientists might see
them. First, let us begin with the present scene and then work back-
wards.
There are about 100 million persons of Native American descent in
the Americas. At least 30 million speak Native languages while an equal
number are of predominantly Native race but speak Spanish, Portu-
guese, or English. Does a person cease to be an "Indian" because he
216


[Page 235]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures217
learns to speak English or Spanish? Does a person cease to be an
"Indian" because he has some degree of non-Indian ancestry? Does a
person cease to be an "Indian" because his ancient "tribal" or local
loyalty is replaced by a new "pan-Indian" or "national" identification?
These questions have not yet been answered. They will not be an-
swered by ,vhite social scientists but by people of Native race as the
latter acquire the power to control the categories of their own existence.
In any event, itis clear that people of Native race will exercise a
powerful role in the future of the Americas and it will not matter what
white people call them!
In the United States there are several millions of persons who are of
predominantly Native race, including almost all Chicanos, many Puerto
Ricans, and some Guatemalans, Nicaraguans, and Panamanians. All of
these people need to be recognized as being of Native :ace, in whole or
in part.
Most contemporary Native Americans are very poor, economically
speaking. The teacher must be aware of this poverty and, at the same
time, be able to explain why Indians exist under adverse conditions. It
must be openly acknowledged that Indians are poor because white
people are rich, that the land, timber, and minerals which white people
use to produce their wealth were virtually all taken by force or decep-
tion. It must be recognized that Indian reservations usually exist in
marginal land, not originally of value from the perspective of white
economic development.
The 'teacher must also be able to deal realistically and truthfully with
the political status of Native Americans. Constitutionally speaking, In-
e'an tribes (or nations ) are legally autonomous self-governing territories
of the United States. They are ryst a part of any state, although included
w;thin ;Late boundaries. Legaleach tribal government possesses the
right to completely determine its own internal affairs in a manner di-
rectly comparable to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Unfortunately, however, the United States government has chosen to
ignore the Constitution and treaties, in so far as Indians are concerned.
From the 1870's to the 1930's the Bureau of Indian Affairs (The United
States' "colonial office") illegally seized control over the internal affairs
of tribes and transformed each Indian homeland into a colony. Since the
1930's the so-called "reservations" continue to exhibit many colonial
characteristics, although some tribes have been able to regain a certain
amount of local independence. The teacher must recognize that reserva-
tions are, by and large, colonies in which political power is exercised by
foreign "rulers" in Washington, D. C., and from which economic and
labor resources are extracted with little return to the Indian people. In
spite of these problems, though, Indian people do not wish to have their


[Page 236]
218TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"reservations" abolished. Instead, they wish to be liberated from bureau-
cratic dominance in order to possess self-government in their own home-
lands. It is also necessary, of course, that additional land be returned to
Indian tribes so that each group can possess a viable economy.
The teacher must also attempt to deal with the history of Indian
people, insofar as possible, from the Indian viewpoint. Let me make a
few major points to illustrate what I mean:
1. The unsubstantiated theories of white ..athropologists need to be
treated as such. For example, Native Americans are not "mongoloid"
because, first, there is no such thing as a "mongoloid" and, second,
because there is not a shred of evidence linking Indians exclusively
with any single "race."
2. The "Bering Straits" migration theory needs to be treated with great
skepticism, since there is absolutely no evidence (except logic) to
support it. Indian people generally believe that they evolved or were
created in the Americas. This viewpoint should be respected although
it is acceptable to discuss the possibility of migration as an alternative
explanation. The point is that there is no empirical evidence to
support any particular migration theory.
3. Indians should be treated as the original Americans and the first
20,000 years of American history need to be discussed prior toany
discussion of European, African, or Asian migrations to the Ameri-
cas. Likewise, in the discussion of the pre-European period data
derived from archaeology should be supplemented by Indian tradi-
tional literature (as found in The Book of the Hopi, The Sacred Pipe,
The Constitution of the Six Nations, and other available paperback
books).
4. The on-going evolution of Indian groups needs to be dealt with, from
1492 to the present. That is, one needs to deal with the internal
history of Native tribes and not merely with European relations. For
example, the development of the Iroquois confederation, the Chero-
kee Constitution of 1824, the Handsome Lake religion, the Coman-
che-Kiowa-Kiowa Apache-Cheyenne-Arapaho alliance system, the
westward movements of the Otchipwe, Cree, Dakotas and others, the
teachings of the Shawnee Prophet, the Kickapoo Prophet, andso on,
need to be discussed as significant developments in the heartland of
America at a time when Europeans are only marginal (i.e., along the
Atlantic Coast).
5. The teacher needs to deal truthfully with European expansion. Native
wars of liberation and independence need to be dealt with as such
and not as acts of aggression carried out against "peaceful" (but
invading) whites.


[Page 237]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures219
6. The teacher will want to try to use accurate names for the Indian
groups in his or her region (such as Otchipwe in place of Chippewa).
The correct names can usually be found in Hodge's Handbook of
Indians North of Mexico.
7. Native heroes and resistance leaders of the post-1890 period (such as
Carlos Montezuma and Yukioma) need to be dealt withIndian
resistance did not cease with the "last Indian war."
8. American history, from the Native perspective, is not merely a mate-
rial "success story" (bigger and bigger, more and more, better and
better), nor does it consist solely in the reverse (that whites have
actually brought about the near-destruction of this land). History is
not progressive, but cyclical. That is, the evils of the white man and
some Indians and others is a repetition of previous eras wherein other
people went astray and contributed to the destruction of a cycle. We
are now in the fourth or fifth world from the Native perspective.
This world may be self:destroyed because of man's evil. More and
more inventions, etc., may not lead to any great "utopia" in the
future, but simply to the end of this epoch. Furthermore, what really
matters is the spiritual struggle of all creatures, the struggle for
perfect "character development," not a great invention.
White people, for example, may exalt over the development of a new
type of rocket ship and regard a flight to the moon as an event worth
recording in a history book. But from a wholly different perspective
the decision of an "ordinary" man to give up a needed job whose
demands run counter to his ethics is more significant because it is a
"spiritual" act directly relevant to man's highest level of aspiration.
From the traditional Indian perspective, at least, the history of Amer-
ica should focus on man's spiritual development and not on his
material "progress."
Finally, let me conclude by emphasizing that the teacher in the
United States has a tremendous opportunity, the chance to teach about
two of the most inspiring seqtonces of events we can think of. First is
the 20,000-year struggle of the Indian people to develop the art of living
in harmony with the Universe. Second, is the 500-year struggle of the
Native American people to resist conquest and to remain 'true to their
heritage.
"A man can be outwardly conquered, and if he opens his soul to the
conqueror, he can be inwardly conquered as well. But if he keeps his
soul, he can remain free although his body is in chains. Conquered but
still free, that is the secret of Indian survival from Alaska to Patago-
nia!" If you can help your students to comprehend that message you
can be proud of your role as a teacher.
C:


[Page 238]
220TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Suggested Teaching Strategies
.
by Elizabeth 0. Pearson*
Main Idea
A. Spiritual beliefs of Native Americans provide the foundation for their way of
life.
1. Ask students to list their feelings toward nature. Pictures of plants,
animals and natural settings such as rivers, oceans and deserts can be
shown to help them probe their feelings more carefully. The list should
be set aside while students familiarize themselves with American art,
literature and religion. Students can choose to study one particular tribe
of Indians, or three or four students can study Indian groups in a
particular region of the U.S.
A careful assessment should then be made of Native American atti-
tudes toward nature. For example:
a.Is nature to be conquered?
b.Is its beauty to remain untouched by human hands?
c.Is nature meant to be feared?
The list of students' attitudes toward nature should be discussed and
compared with the feelings of Indians toward nature. Students should
discuss reasons for differences in their attitude compared to that of
Indian groups.
2. Find art and legends which portray the values of Indian groups. Water-
less Mountain by Laura Adams Armer includes Indian poetry within the
novel as does IshiLast of His Tribe by Theodore Kroeber. Other books
include North American Indian Mythology by Cottie Bur land, useful for
its illustrations and tales. Indians on Horseback by Alice Marriott deals
with customs of Plains Indians. Winter Telling Stories for Children,
edited by Alice Marriott, includes tales of the Kiowa Indians.
After determining some basic values of Native American culture,
students should identify current social issues which relate to particular
values. For example, the preservation of nature relates to the issue of
forest and national park usage, and logging.
Students might then want to explore all sides of a particular issue,
determine alternative means of solving the problem and look at conse-
quences. The underlying values in each alternative should be delin-
eated.
See page 117 for biographical sketch.


[Page 239]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures221
3. Ask students to list and group Indian artifacts such as masks, kachina
dolls, baskets, jewelry, rugs and cooking utensils. Allow them to group
items on their list any way they wish, but they should explain their
categories. Then have students do research on the artifacts, determin-
ing the regional and tribal origins, usage and significance of each one.
A visit to a nearby museum which has exhibits on Native Americans
would be a useful part of the research as well as reading Indian legends.
On the completion of research, students should again look at the list
of artifacts and their categories. Comparison with the results of their
research should reveal their initial accuracies and misconceptions.
Main Idea
B. Relations between Native Americans and whites have been characterized
by whites exploiting Native cultures.
1. Indians were placed on reservations to allow more room for white settle-
ment. The quality of land was poor and Indians had no choice of loca-
tion. Have students examine the rationale of the American government
for setting aside reservation land for Indians and the feelings of Indians
about that action at the time.
What were the alternatives for the American government and the
Indians? Consequences for each alternative should be considered. Ask
students, considering all the knowledge they have about the move to
reservations, to make a decision themselves as to what they think
should have been done.
2. Feeling history makes it more alive to students, allowing them to get out
of their cultural setting and familiarize themselves with a setting differ-
ent in time, place and life style. Suggest that students become familiar
with a specific Indian tribe and manner of life during the mid nineteenth
century through films, pictures, stories and nonfiction accounts. Study
their ways of obtaining food, clothing and shelter, the customs, Mi.
gious beliefs and the relationship with white men. Then have students
enact scenes they write concerning aspects of the life of the particular
tribe.
Discuss what it means to stereotype so that students will be aware of
the difference between portraying how the Indian actually lived and the
white man's biased view of how the Indian lived.
3. A comparison of Indian treatment by whites in the nineteenth century
and twentieth century can delineate the differences between the Indi-
an's tactics and effectiveness against white encroachment in two differ-
ent centuries. Two films are useful for this purpose. "Custer: The Amer-
ican Surge Westward," distributed by McGraw-Hill Text Films, focuses
on the effect of white settlement on the Plains Indians and their treat-


[Page 240]
222TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
ment on reservations. The film ends with Custer's defeat in the Battle of
the Little Big Horn.
"You Are on Indian Land," distributed by McGraw-Hill, presents a
confrontation between the Mohawks and the Cornwall, Ontario police as
the Indians protest a toll bridge and road put through their land. Al-
though it takes place in Canada, the incident represents a common
happening in the United States with tactics the same as in the United
States.
Following are appropriate questions for comparing nineteenth- and
twentieth-century treatment of Indians:
a. How have legal means for Indians to protest and redress injustices
changed in 100 years?
b. Compare the methods of protest which Indians used against whites
before reservations were established with protest methods which
they have used in the twentieth century when reservations were a
way of life for most Indians.
c. How successful were Indian protests 100 years ago compared to the
1960's and 1970's?
Main Idea
C. The Native American is faced with a conflict in values between his culture
and that of contemporary white America.
1. "Geronimo Jones" by Learning Corporation of America is a superb film
showing the conflict a Papago boy is faced with because he lives be-
tween two cultures. Other films which have a similar theme focus on the
urban Indian. "Minority Youth: Adam" by BFA Educational Media is
narrated by Adam, an Indian youth who talks about the inroads living in
the city make on the survival of Indian culture. "Eddie: American
Indian Boy" is a filmstrip in a series entitled Children of the Inner City
by SVE Educational Filmstrips. Eddie's school life, family and father's
work are described, with a reference to the Indian Center as a place of
familiarity within a city of strangeness. Another film dealing with cul-
tural identity is an animated film entitled "Charley Squash Goes to
Town" by Learning Corporation of America. It poses the question im-
plicit in all the other films: Is it possible to find an alternative to remain-
ing Indian and living the life of a white man in America?
A complete study of cultural conflicts through these films and any
other aids teachers can find, such as fiction, nonfiction, representatives
of the Indian community, can be followed by exploring carefully possible
alternatives and consequences for the Native American in the seventies.
It is not expected that students will decide upon a solution. However, an
awareness of the problem and knowledge of the issues are important
for students to know if they are to understand Native Americans in
today's society.


[Page 241]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures223
2. Ask students if they are familiar with Native American groups in your
state which represent the interests of Native Americans in the press,
legislature and on legal issues. Research by students who are unfamil-
iar with these groups should uncover active groups in your state.
Through newspapers and local periodicals, students will learn the activi-
ties of Indian groups and methods of publicizing their message.Stu-
dents should also find out how groups are dealing with the cultural
conflict which exists between Indians and whites.
3. Although cultural conflict is presentinthe lives of most Indians, some
have managed to come to terms with their Indianness in a technological
society. Benny Bearskin is a Native American living in Chicago and is
deeply attached to his Indian heritage, but at the same time exists
happily in the city. A narrative by him is printed inDivision Street:
Americaby Studs Terkel. The following excerpt gives a brief insight into
Benny's life.
"I came to Chicago in 1947, after I had been married, and later on I
sent for my wife and my one child and since that time we'velived here
in the city. The most important reason was that I could at leastfeel
confident (of] perhaps fifty paychecks a year here ... and youcan't
always get that way. Even though it might be more pleasant to be back
home, for instance, Nebraska.
II... thisis one feature most Indians have in common. They have a
deep attachment for the land. This has been so for a long, long time.
Many different tribes of Indians are now residing in Chicago, but most
of them maintain ties with the people back home. Even in cases where
the older members of their families have passed away, they still make a
point to go home. Many of them make the trip twice a year to go back to
the place where they were born and raised. ""
A complete reading of Bearskin's account of life in Chicago reveals
how he has come to terms with city life and his feelings about being an
Indian. Other accounts of this kind will give students some idea of how
life in an urban society is possible for the Native American.


[Page 242]
224TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
FOOTNOTES
' These goals are taken from a manuscnpt developed by the author.
' Black Elk, The Sacred Pipe, edited by John Epes Brown (Baltimore: Penguin, 1971),
pp. 5-7. Used with permission.
' John Epes Brown, "The Spiritual Legacy of the American Indian," Tomorrow, Au-
tumn, 1964, pp. 297-307.
' From Warpath, Vol. I, No. 2, 1968, p. 3. Reprinted with permission.
' Carlos Castafieda, The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge. Origi-
nally published by the University of California Press; excerpt reprinted by permission of
the Regents of the University of California.
' Excerpted from The Lost Universe by Gene Weltfish. Basic Books, Inc., New York.
' John Collier, Indians of the Americas (New York: New American Library, 1947), pp. 4
ff.
' Jack D. Forbes, "The Native American Experience in California History," Neither
Separate Nor Equal, Race and Racism in California (San Francisco: California Historical
Society, 1971), pp. 14-22.
' Ibid.
4 Forbes, "The Native American Experience in Calfomia History," p. 22.
"Terkel, Studs, Division Street: America (New York: Pantheon Books/A Division of
Random House, Inc.) p. 105. Reprinted with permission.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
There are many bad books about Native Americans, usually written by non-
Indians. On the other hand, there are quite a number of excellent sources
available, many of which are in an inexpensive paperback form and are useful as
high-school supplementary material. The following are especially recommended:
Black Elk, The Sacred Pipe, ed. by John Epes Brown (Baltimore: Penguin, 1971). Provides
keen insight into the religion and values of the Oglala Lakota (Sioux) people.
Black Elk Speaks, ed. by John G. Niehardt (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1961).
The life-story of Black Elk, shedding light on Indian history as well as religion.
Gene Weltfish, The Lost Universe (New York: Ballantine, 1971). An excellent portrayal of
the culture of the Chahiksichahiks (Pawnee) people as of the 1860's. It is perhaps the
best book available by an anthropologist of non-Indian background.
Frank Waters, The Book of the Hopi (New York: Ballantine, 1969). A good book,
although it suffers from a trace of anti-Nabahoo (Navajo) bias and may not always
reflect traditional Hopi beliefs accurately.
Frank Waters, The Man Who Killed the Deer (New York: Pocket Books, 1971). A fiction
work but one which provides insight into traditional Taiinamu (Taos) life, as well as a
focus upon modern-day cultural wallas. This is not a "perfect" book but it is, nonethe-
less, useful.
Jack D. Forbes, Native Americans of California and Nevada (Healdsburg: Nativegraph
Press, 1969). The text itself focuses primarily upon California and Nevada but the
general picture of Native history revealed is applicable elsewhere. The last one-fourth of
the book contains sections of value to all teachers, including an extensive bibliography.


[Page 243]
Teaching Native American Values and Cultures225
Jack D. Forbes, ed.,The Indian in America's Past(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1965).
An anthology portraying Native history and Native-white-Black relations through 1965.
Vine Deloria, Jr.,Custer Died for Your Sins(New York: Macmillan, 1969). An excellent
overall discussion of the contemporary problems of Native Americans.
Stan Steiner,The New Indians(New York: Harper & Row, 1968). A satisfactory exposi-
tion of contemporary movements among Indians, especially during the early 1960's. The
book suffers from certain Inaccuracies but it still remains useful.
William R. Jacobs,Dispossessing the American Indian(New York: Scribner's, 1972). A
good analysis, from a sympathetic although non-Indian viewpoint, of the early relations
between whites and Natives in North America (with some attention devoted to recent
events and consequences).
Edmund Wilson,Apologies to the Iroquois(New York: Vintage, 1966 edition). A journal-
istic, informative, interesting account of the struggles of Indians in one area to achieve
simple justice in the face of continuous white aggression. The book emphasizes the 1957-
1959 period.
Vine Deloria, Jr., WeTalk, You Listen(New York: Harper's, 1970). An excellent follow-
up toCuster Died for Your Sinsdesigned to apply Indian thinking to many facets of
modern American life.
N. Scott Momaday,House Made of Dawn(New York: Harper & Row, 1966). A well-
known and deserving novel depicting the Indian-white clash of cultures, with emphasis
upon the problems of the "urban Indian."
Jerome Rothenberg, ed.,Shaking the Pumpkin: Traditional Poetry of the Indian North
Americans(New York: Doubleday, 1972). A large (almost 500-page) collection of
Native American songs, chants, and written poetry. This volume is not only very
interesting, but it provides "firsthand" insight into Native values and viewpoints.
.-1C........


[Page 244]
F
i
4
Francesco CordascoDiego Castellanos
FRANCESCO CORDASCO is Professor of Education at Montclair
State College. He received his B.A. degree from Columbia University
and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from New York University. He has
taught at Long Island University, New York University, University of
Puerto Rico, City University of New York, and the University of Lon-
don. Professor Cordasco has served as a consultant to numerous agen-
cies and institutions, including the Newark Archdiocesan Board of
Education, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. and the National Educa-
tion Association.
His many articles dealing with the problems of educating ethnic
minority groups have appeared in a wide variety of journals and in the
Congressional Record. His books include Educational Sociology, Puerto
Rican Children in Mainland Schools, Education in the Urban Commu-
nity, Minorities in the American Cities, The School in the Social Order,
The Social History of Poverty: The Urban Experience, and most re-
cently, Puerto Ricans on the United States Mainland: A Bibliography of
Reports, Texts, Critical Studies and Related Materials. Dr. Cordasco
received the Brotherhood Award of The National Conference of Chris-
tians and Jews in 1967 (New Jersey Region).
DIEGO CASTELLANOS is a candidate for a graduate degree at Mont-
clair State College in the Spanish-Speaking Teacher Corps funded under
the Education Professions Development Act and, with Dr. Cordasco,
co-authored Puerto Ricans on the United States Mainland: A Bibliogra-
phy of Reports, Texts, Critical Studies and Related Materials (1972).
226


[Page 245]
FRANCESCO CORDASCO,
WITH DIEGO CASTELLANOS
10
Teaching the
Puerto Rican Experience
Jesus Martinez is about to enter school. He is a fine looking five-year-
old. He has perfect eyesight, normal hearing, and good strong teeth. He
speaks very well, is in excellent health, and of above-average intelli-
gence. Hence, he has no learning disabilities. Yet, this young American
cannot be educated in most school districts of the states. In fact, most
educators here cannot begin to teach him.'
His father, Jose Martinez, migrated to the United States mainland 20
years ago at the age of six. At a time when he was ready to learn to read
and write his mother tongue, Jose was instead suddenly thrust into an
exclusively English-speaking environment where the only tool he pos-
sessed for oral communication was completely useless to him. When he
went to school it was as if the teacher were broadcasting in AM but Jose
was equipped to receive her only in FM. He remembers it this way: "My
teacher and I could not communicate with each other because each
spoke a different language and neither one spoke the language of the
other. This made me stupid, or retarded, or at least disadvantaged."
Since teachers cannot be expected to "work miracles" on kids who are
disadvantaged, Jose fell victim to the self-fulfilling prophecy, "He won't
make it." They agreed, however, to allow him to "sit there" because the
law required that he be in school.
For the next two years Jose "vegetated" in classes he did not under-
standpraying that the teacher would not call on him. The fact is the
teacher rarely called on him and seldom collected his papers on the
grounds that she could not expect of Jose what she demanded of the
227


[Page 246]
228TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
"more fortunate" children. Reasonable as this notion appears to be, it
served only to cause the child's self-concept to deteriorate.
Another Puerto Rican boy in the classroom who spoke English was
asked to teach Jose English and help him in the process of adjustment.
They were not permitted, however, to speak Spanish to each other
because it would "confuse Jose and prolong the period of transition"
also because it annoyed the hell out of other people who did not
understand what they were saying. The other boy, then, could not
translate academic subject matter for Jose. English was the one and only
priority. In other words, he would have to "break the code" before
getting the message. By the time he began to understand English, he was
so far behind academically that he had to work twice as hard to keep
from sinking. "It was," recalls Jose, "like swimming with lead bracelets."
He was appropriately labeled "handicapped" by his teacher. Labels used
by his schoolmates were not so kind. In fact, each time he would
attempt to use his English, some of the other children would ridicule him
for his imperfect grasp of the language. The teacher thought this was all
right because it forced Jose to check his mistakes and provided himan
incentive to learn proper English. Each day he went to school was as
though he went to battle. The situation became unbearable when, asa
result of a test administered in English, Jose was found to be academi-
cally retarded and was put in a class for the mentally retarded.
He retreated into a sort of psychological isolation and began to hate
not only school, but the society he saw reflected by the school. Frus-
trated and discouraged, he began to find reasons for staying home from
school and, as soon as permitted, dropped out (a human reaction toan
inhuman situation). Jose, who refers to himself as a school "push-out,"
never really learned English well. He has a great deal of difficulty
reading it and cannot write it. He speaks Spanish fluently but never
learned how to read and write his mother tongue. He is a functional
illiterate in two languages!.
When (and if) he is working, it is usually at the lowest paying job. He
is the first to be laid off, remains unemployed longest, and is least able to
adapt to changing occupational requirements? As Jose reflectswithout
smilingupon his boyhood ordeal, his concerns turn to his youngson
who is about to embark on his own educational experience. He knows
the educational process has undergone a drastic overhaul in the past few
years. He wonders if the system is now ableor willingto deal with
his son and vice versa. He knowstoo wellthat a Puerto Rican child
in the States who at the beginning of school is unable to acquire literacy
in English in competition with his English-speaking classmates and who
is not permitted to acquire it in his own language makes a poor begin-
ning that he may never be able to overcome.


[Page 247]
rwa-gt.
AO'
*4.1,
.4
a+)


[Page 248]
230 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
His one ray of hope stems from the fact that new dimensions have
been added to the concept of 2ccountability in education. In terms of
behavioral objectives, for example, there is a growing emphasison
individual performance rather than class achievement. And in a philo-
sophical sense, the burden of responsibility for success or failure in the
learning process has shifted from the students to the educators.
This means school systems can no longer explain away children as
unteachable because "they are deprived"regardless of their cultural,
linguistic and/or socio-economic characteristics.' Sociological adjectives
have been used in the past to alibi non-education. Modern educators are
striking at the long-held debilitating syndrome that the schoolcan
educate only those whose mold fits the curriculum. They are saying, if
that is the extent of the school's capacity, then truly the school isa
"disadvantaged" institution!
They admit that many children who have been traditionally tagged
"deprived" have often proven to be no more deprived than the deprived
budgets, deprived imaginations orin some casesdeprivedcon-
sciences of the school district brandishing the label.
They admit that many children called retarded have simply been
victims of antiquated school systems using obsolete methods of instruc-
tion for the sake of "maintaining tradition."
They admit that many have suffered the effects of the ethnocentric
philosophies and curricula of schools that offer only "assimilateor
perish" alternatives for minorities and then employ scapegoating ration-
alizations for subsequent minority failures and dropouts.
They admit that the system has historically brainwashed newcomers
into believing that their language, culture, and system of valueswere
inferior because they were different; that they believed these people had
to be de-educated so they could be molded into our brand of citizen-
ship; and that any group that resisted acculturation was thought to be
uncivilized, un-American, and potentially subversive.
They admit that non-English-speaking children usually have no
other handicap than that imposed upon them by a school which tries to
teach them in a language they don't understand.
In other words, a Puerto Rican child who has lived his first five or six
years in a Spanish-language environment is ready to learn to read and
write in Spanish but not yet in English. After all, they don't expect the
Anglo child to begin his reading in material that is outside his listening-
speaking vocabulary, so why expect it of another child? Especially when
Anglo children profit from carefully prepared reading-readiness pro-
grams not available to non-English-speaking children.
The task of the beginning reader should not be compounded by
expecting him to read a foreign language before he can read his own.


[Page 249]
$
Teaching the Pueito Rican Experience231
His initial task should be limited to one of converting the printed word
into its spoken form which he already recognizes. (Incidentally, because
of the excellence of the Spanish writing system, thereare no "reading
problems"as we have hereamong children in Puerto Rico.)5 Many
administrators and teachers in our schools try their bestin Englishto
make Puerto rti$,an children feel comfortable and welcome. But thou-
sands of these youngsters have been cheated, damaged,or both by well-
intentioned but ill-informed educational policies which have made of
their language and culture an ugly disadvantage in their lives and have
thought it more important to teach them English than to educate them.
What we seem at times to be incredibly dense about is that it is just as
normal to speak something other than English. Billions of people all
over the earth do, including millions in the United States and thousands
in our school systems. It is a striking contradiction thatwe spend
millions of dollars to encourage students to learn a foreign language, yet
virtually no part of school budgets goes to maintain and further develop
the Aative language competence which already exists in children who
speal: these same languages as a result of their own family background.
On the contrary, we go to all sorts of trouble to eradicate the child's
language and substitute the school's before we begin to teach him. This
is more than a contradiction; it is absurd!
A growing number of educators are now saying it may makemore
sense to change the school's language instead sf the child's. This is an
oversimplification, but the basic argument behind this thesis is that
children learn when taught in their native languageespecially in the
early stages of their schooling.
While learning to read and write his mother tongue, the chi'd needs
careful training in learning, understanding, and speaking Engi..aas a
Second Language (ESL) through an aural-oral approach before learning
to read and write it. (If he has learned to decode his native tongue in
such a manner that the skills can be transferred to the reading of
English, then he has made a double accomplishment.)' Meanwhile, his
cor'ept development, his acquisition of information and experiencein
sum, his total educationwould not have to wait until he masters
English because the entire curriculum would be taught in his native
language while a gradual transition is being made to English. This
approach, known as "bilingual education," permits making a clear dis-
tinction between education and language; i.e., between the content of
education and the vehicle through which it is acquired.
The term "bilingual" seems to carry its meaning clearly within it. And
yet a discussion involving the word soon reveals the strikingly different
concepts that people have of it. If a child speaks only Spanish, he is not
bilingual. And if the school offers him a course for English language


[Page 250]
232TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
skills, without the use of his native tongue, that is not bilingual educa-
tion. Bilingual education is instruction in two languages. It is the use of
both English and the child's mother tongue as media of instruction of
the school's curriculum. Academic subjects are taught in the child's
dominant language until he becomes functional in the second language.'
The "second language" concept is one of chronological primacy.
English must be second because the child has already learned the first
one. It has nothing to do with the inevitable fact of English being the
national language in the United States. English is neither native nor
indigenous, but was one of the group of languages brought here by the
colonial powers. There's no logical reason why everyone has to function
only in English. Even this is often misinterpreted by many educators.
English is not being taught as a second language if the process is
attempting to supplant the child's first (already-acquired) vernacular.
Furthermore, the techniques used in ESL are not identical to those used
in teaching English as a Native Language or English as a Foreign
Language. ESL is a precise discipline requiring a specific approach.
English, most people agree, should be taught by native English speak-
ers who need not necessarily be bilingual. The rest of the curriculum
should be taught by native speakers of Spanish, who also need not be
bilingual, but who are able to relate to the cultural background of the
students. The rationale behind this is that children learn more by imita-
tion and analogy than by prescription. This is particularly applicable to
the learning of pronunciation and of cultural values. Authenticityin
speech and in cultural representationis of prime importance; and this
authenticity cannot be faked or acquired overnight. Consequently, a
team teaching approach is usually necessary for a good bilingual pro-
gram.'
There is no bible on methodology for bilingual education. One com-
mon approach is to group the children with language difficulties and
begin educating them in their "home language," introducing ESL after
they have adjusted to the initial school experience. This program can be
implemented in an ungraded Situation if the number of children does
not warrant a full-scale program. If the program cannot be extended to
all non-English speakers, the effort should be concentrated on the pri-
mary grades. But if a district's greatest needs prove to be in the upper
grades, the children's home language should be used to teach them those
subjects considered to be the areas of highe3t achievement in the chil-
dren's culture (such as their history) and courses that may be expected
to be of particular occupational utility to the children.
Besides the pedagogical soundness of teaching young children basic
subjects in their own tongue, bilingual education is proposed as a more
humane and enriched school experience for Puerto Rican children. Its


[Page 251]
-1111........
.411111w'
-"
"The content of the curriculum and the teaching strategies used should be tailored to
the unique learning and incentive/motivational styles of the children of the particular
district."


[Page 252]
234TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
strengths are psychological as well as linguistic. A Puerto Rican teacher
in the classroom does more than speak Spanish. She creates a familiar
climate which lessens the child's anxieties and frees him to concentrate
on his main job of learning. She also provides a means toward the
development of a harmonious and positive self-image.
It would be well for those who are designing bilingual programs to
keep in mind that the instructional use of the Spanish language in the
classroom is not sufficient in itself to improve the education of these
children and that a new curriculum must be devised with cultural as well
as language requirements. A truly effective program of bilingual educa-
tion should encompass bicultural education as well. It should include
systematic curricular coverage of the history and heritage of Puerto
Rico. In fact, such inclusions often are as important for the student's
effective development as the use of the Spanish language is for develop-
ing his cognitive skills, or as the learning of English as a second language
is for his socio-economic survival.'
The content of the curriculum and the teaching strategies used should
be tailored to the unique learning and incentive/motivational styles of
the children of the particular district. Irrelevant textbooks and materials
should not be used. For example, social studies units in the Northeast
should include materials on Puerto Rico and Cuba instead of Mexico or
Spain.
As the students move toward a greater degree of independence in the
second language, the curriculum naturally begins to include a gradually
increasing quantity of reading and writing in the alternate language until
it reaches parity with Spanish. At that point (usually around the third
year) Spanish can be slowly phased out as the medium of instruction,
and all subjects can be taught in English. Then the Puerto Rican stu-
dents can be mixed in classrooms with other English-speaking children
and Spanish may be taught as a second language to any student who
wants it. Theoretically, classes where the composition is one half Puerto
Rican have the perfect ingredients to create a fully integrated bilingual
situation in which Puerto Rican pupils can learn English while native
English-speaking volunteers can learn Spanish.' After all, the native
population should be afforded the same advantage (of speaking two
languages). At the beginning of each school year, diagnostic tests should
be used to determine the relative strength of the children's two lan-
guages to make it possible to record the factor of language balance each
year. Provisions should then be made for increasing the instructional use
of both languages for both groups in the same classroom. The resulting
interaction between the two languages and cultures could indeed be the
first step toward the desirable and attainable goal of a bilingual society.
Bilingual education is not a novelty. Many types of bilingual curricula


[Page 253]
et'
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience235
are found throughout the world. Among the nations that have accepted
this educational practice are Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Mex-
ico, Paraguay, Peru, Russia, South Africa, and Switzerland. Yet, the
American school system, with students from various and different cul-
tures, has virtually ignored the potentiality of bilingual education.
The Congress of the United States recognized this when it enacted the
Bilingual Education ActTitle VII of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act (ESEA)which represents a legal, moral, and financial
(albeit tardy and weak) commitment to the promotion of cultural diver-
sity and linguistic pluralism.
The main priorities of Title VII at its enactment were:
(1) to provide equal educational opportunities to non-English-speak-
ing children;
(2) to strengthen the education and self-concept of bilingual pupils;
(3) to promote bilingualism among all students.
The Act is designed to meet the special educational needs of children 3
to 18 years of age with limited English-speaking ability and who come
from environments where the dominant language is other than En-
glishparticularly low-income families. The concern is for children to
develop greater competence in English, to become more proficient in the
use of two languages, and to profit from increased educational opportu-
nity. It has been demonstrated that:
(1) Children in bilingual education programs progress better in school,
with minimal grade retentions, and reach grade-level achievement in
all subject areas.
(2) Non-English-speaking children in bilingual educationprograms be-
come more proficient both in English and their mother tongue.
(3) Children in bilingual education programs develop a sure under-
standing and respect for their mother tongue and the culture associ-
ated with it. This understanding and respect lead to a more positive
self-image and better social and personal adjustment.
Grants under Title VII are available for exemplary pilot or demon-
stration projects in bilingual and bicultural education in a wide variety
of settings." These projects should demonstrate how the education pro-
gram can be improved by the use of bilingual education. Title VII funds
may be used also for providing preservice and inservice training to
teachers, supervisors, counselors, aides and other auxiliary education
personnel, and for establishing and maintaining programs. The money
may also be used for research, development and dissemination of in-
structional materials, acquiring necessary materials and equipment,


[Page 254]
236TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
making optimum use of educational and cultural resources in the area,
and for improving cooperation between the home and the school.
These last two points cannot be overemphasized. It is unlikely that
quality education can be brought to any community until its members
participate in the decision-making process that will shape the future of
their children's education. Parent participation is particularly indispens-
able in bilingual programs, for in most Puerto Rican communities par-
ents have considerable knowledge of language and heritage.
Parents should be remunerated to serve as language and history
consultants. Curriculum should be developed in such a way that parents
can teach portions of it to their children at home. There should be
special classes for parents to acquaint them with what their children are
doing and how they can positively affect the youngsters' progress. The
Puerto Rican parent will support the goals and values of the school
when the school begins to recognize the worth of his culture and realize
that he can make unique contributions to the educational processnot
only in curriculum development but also in other school activities
including policy decisions.
Inherent in the educational structure is, and will continue to be,
decision making at the top. Inherent in social change is citizens' partici-
pation in decision making. Too often, the attitude of the decision-mak-
ers has been that of one municipal official who recently said, "We know
_,t
Vo
cpilem Ore /e
,


[Page 255]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience237
how to solve your problems better than you do." There is every reason
to believe that this statement is incorrect, and that participation by
people who are close to the problems will help to design better programs
which are more in touch with reality. It is a good idea for public schools
to cooperate with Puerto Rican organizations which have thus far
worked unaided and unrecognized to maintain two-language compe-
tence in their children.'
One detriment to bilingual education in the past has been the lack of
Spanish-speaking personnel in schoolsespecially in the classroom.
Excessiveoften unrealisticcredential requirements, combined with
discriminatory practices, account for the crying shortage. Administrators
have attempted to remedy the situation in two waysneither of which
has been totally successful.
In some cases, readily available surpluses of Cuban educators have
been certified through special programs. The programs, however, have
experienced some "hang-ups." One is the unwillingness of school dis-
tricts to employ its graduatesfor various reasons. Essentially, most
superintendents feel that although the historical, cultural and linguistic
characteristics of Puerto Ricans and Cubans are very similar, Cuban
teachers might not relate properly to Puerto Rican students in theareas
of social orientation, national identity, and political attitudes.
Caught in the dilemma of either having Spanish-speaking Cubans
teach their children or having English-speaking Americans, the Puerto
Rican leadership has accepted the former. While it is known that Cu-
bans as a group tend to be prejudiced against Puerto Ricans, their
prejudice takes the form of disdain rather than hostility. The strong
militant elements in Puerto Rican communities have undertaken the
task of sensitizing these teachers." Another effort by superintendents to
alleviate the bilingual teacher shortage has been to recruit teachers
directly from Puerto Rico. This, too, has been met with mixed emotions
by the Puerto Rican communities. Their feeling is that islandersare not
equipped to solve the problems that abound here 'because life here is
different from life on the island. Anglo-American educators who have
gone to Puerto Rico for fresh insights into the problem of teaching
Puerto Rican children are amazed to find out that the problem doesn't
exist in Puerto Rico. Communities should first develop theresources
available here before importing outside helpin spite of the clamor for
academic credentials.
It is tragic the way districts are failing to take advantage of human
resources available through the community. With a little bit of prag-
matic logic, bilingual paraprofessionals could be readily employedas
teacher aides, truant officers and school-home liaisons. These aides
could follow-up children who begin to display the results of culture


[Page 256]
f
238TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
conflicts, of home overcrowding, of malnutritionor any other diffi-
culty. In addition, family counseling should be instituted to improve the
home environment of the students.
A core set of bilingual counselors should be hired to serve the needs of
students and to act as ombudsmen or liaison between the school district
and the community. At least one bilingual or bicultural staff person
should be available at all times to meet with parents. In addition to
hiring bicultural and bilingual teachers and other key people, schools
should require inservice training programs on Puerto Rican culture,
which would strengthen the total school staff effectiveness. Administra-
tors of schools where half the student population is Puerto Ricanshould
be bilingual educators, either native speakers of Spanish who also have a
good command of English or native speakers of English who have a
good command of Spanish plus a sympathetic understanding of the
culture of the consumers of their institutions' precious commodity. Else,
they shc dld be required to take a course or attend an institute dealing
with the Puerto Rican cultural heritage and contemporary social mover
ment.
Educators must always bear in mind that the attitude displayed by
school personnel can make or break good relations with the community.
Frequently, teachers betray an ill-disguised contempt for the schools and
neighborhoods in which they work. (The same applies to the other
extremely important people: the school secretary, the nurse, social
worker, counselor, the curriculum coordinators, the assistant principals,
and the superintendent.) In addition to being well-trained in academic
subjects, successful "barrio" teachers must possess these effective skills:
(I)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
they must be "attitudinally adjusted" to working with bilirigual,
bicultural students from economically deprived environments
they must be aware of the bilingual student's built-in language
resources as a valuable asset in advancing hiseducation and
contributing to the public welfare
they most possess an effective familiarization with the Spanish
language
they must have deep knowledge of the characteristics of economi-
cally deprived people and also of the cultural traits of the Puerto
Rican population, and be able to distinguish between the differ-
ences in the cultural strata
they must be dedicated to establishing a sound school-community
relations program
they must project to their students an expectation level that will
raise their visions for school success and that will cause high
achievement efforts


[Page 257]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience239
A renewed sense of moral responsibility must be instilled in guidance
counselors. Counselors must endeavor to be more than glorified clerks,
score keepers or statisticians. Guidance sessions should also include
parents. Higher education is now possible for the poor; but sometimes
parents have to be sold on the idea. We don't think counselors, in
general, are keeping up with the times. It is obvious that those who need
counseling the most are getting it the least. The absence ofnecessary
academic services is not only contrary to common sense, but the hard-
ships it imposes on certain children may be in direct violation of the law.
A case in point is Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, promulgated
to prevent discrimination resulting from English language deficiencies in
the operation of any federally assisted program.
Title VI compliance reviews conducted in school districts withmore
than 5 percent Spanish-surnamed student enrollment by the HEW
Office for Civil Rights have revealed a number of common practices
which have the effect of denying equality of educational opportunity to
Spanish-speaking pupils. Rules under the Code of Federal Regulations
declare essentially that:
(1) where inability to speak and understand English excludes Spanish-
speaking children from effective participation in the educational
program offered by a school district, the district must take affirma-
tive steps to open its instructional program to these students
(2) school districts must not assign Spanish-speaking students to classes
for the mentally retarded on the basis of criteria which basically
measure or evaluate English language skills
(3) any ability grouping or tracking system employed by the school to
deal with the special language skill needs of Spanish-speaking chil-
dren must not operate as a permanent track or educational dead end
(4) school districts have the responsibility to adequately notify Spanish-
speaking parents of school activities which are called to the attention
of other parentseven if such notices have to be provided in Span-
ish
Perhaps more fundamental and basic than these recommendations of
Title VI is the spirit and attitude in which theyare carried out. The
motive for implementation ideally should not be out of a sense of guilt
for past injustices to the Puerto Ricans, for political reasons, or forced
legislation. Structures with pity, expediency, or fear as foundationsare
not as enduring or as admirable as those built on humanism, trust, and
justice."
Puerto Ricans represent both a responsibility and a potential educa-
tional resource. Just how educational agencies meet this responsibility


[Page 258]
S
OSP
and exploit this resource depends on the attitude and conscience of the
communities. Some ethnic groups, whatever their true feelings, make
little display of interest in maintaining their mother tongue; the Puerto
Ricans are clamoring for this right. The question of whether or not to
establish a program of bilingual schooling should be faced by the board
and the superintendent without waiting for the community to take the
initiative and most certainly before they are forced to do so by public
pressure.
The social and political imperatives are strong. Puerto Ricans are no
longer the patient, "romantic," non-violent figures of the past. They are
no longer mute while the social worker, the priest, or the politician
transmits his version of Puerto Rican life to the middle-class world, a
version which was more myth than fact. They are beginning to speak for
themselves, perhaps not as objectively but with a lot more accuracy than
well-meaning outsiders. Those who had changed their names from Juan
to John and from Jose to Joseph are changing it back to Juan and back
to Jose. There is a new-born pride in belonging to a bicultural society;
and this awareness is reflected in the increasing demands for bilingual,
bicultural education."
The bilingual concept should extend from the cradle to the grave. It
should involve early childhood, vocational, secondary, continuing and
adult educationas well as higher education.
Professors of Spanish should be replaced (as they retire or leave) with
Puerto Rican educators. In fact, more Puerto Rican personnel should be
employed at all levels. Colleges canand shouldprovide services to
the community other than higher education. Some colleges are begin-
ning to find ways and means to bring the community to their campuses.
Puerto Ricans must stop thinking of college campuses as hallowed
ground not to be trespassed. Colleges should include Puerto Rican
ethnic study programs in their ..anority history curriculum. Many are
240


[Page 259]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience241
only offering courses in Black history, which is but an essential first step
in this society. Forums should include lectures by Puerto Rican speak-
ers.
The Puerto Rican "bridge" generation, whose progress was dwarfed
by Various reasons already mentioned here, never reached the threshold
of higher educatioh. The first generation of children born of Puerto
Rican parents and reared in the mainland United States is just begin-
ning to get its feet in the doors of the institutions of higher learning.
All sorts of gimmicks have been used to keep Puerto Rican children
out of colleges and universities.
Consider, for example, the foreign language requirement for college
admission. Simple logic tells us this requirement can be met easily by a
Puerto Rican. Not so. Schools don't give students credit for a language
unless they learn it in the classroom (even if it happens to be one's
mother tongue). Eligibility to study a "foreign" language is based on
one's reading scores in English. A poor reader of English doesn't qualify
to take another language. No language credit means no college admis-
sion.
Inequities in the methods of testing bicultural children must be elimi-
nated. Puerto Rican children still tend to complete the phrase "Bread
and ..." with coffee instead of butter. And they are still not sure
whether "it is raining or it is sunny" when they see a drawing of a person
carrying an umbrella. Testing has always been a serious educational
roadblock for Puerto Rican students. The failure of psychometric instru-
ments to measure Puerto Rican children validly is recognized as a
principal reason for the over-representation of that ethnic group in
special education, as well as in other low tracks. Tests designed to
measure English comprehension and middle-class cultural values cannot
possibly measure cognitive growth, communication skills, and social and
emotional adjustment of non-English-speaking children who come from
underprivileged families. Poverty is not measured by the IQ tests. The
hunger quotient is not registered. Nor is the psychological effect of poor
clothing, disease, illness, and discrimination computed in the 'surveys of
the lack of motivation, educational achievement, and rates of dropout.
Puerto Rican students have the worst dropout rate of all students
even worse than that of Blacks. Some statistics show that if the dropout
rate of English-speaking Black students is twice as bad as that of white
students, the rate of Puerto Rican dropout is two and a half times as bad
as that of English-speaking whites.
Is bilingual education a long-range solution to the dropout syndrome?
Hopefully, yes. That's one of its objectives. The bilingual approach is
not a panacea, but it is the most promising technique available today. If


[Page 260]
242TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
successful, it could mark the beginning of a new era of educational
opportunity for the Spanish-speaking of this country. This opportunity
will, of course, be converted to economicand eventually to political
power for this minority.
The Bilingual Education Act on balance is a relatively radical piece of
legislation, a more potent means of affecting social change than most
congressmen would like to have around. So they have surrounded the
measure with more sound than substance.16 There has been an appalling
discrepancy between Title VII funds authorization and appropriation.
The amounts actually allotted do not even approach the level of funding
required to adequately meet the needs in this area, not only for opeia-
tional program support but also to provide such necessary components
of a successful bilingual education program as specialized training for
teachers and teacher aides and the development and dissemination of
bilingual instructional materials and special testing instruments. It will
be left to the lobbyists that every large city school system maintains in
the capital to convince Congress over the next few years to close the gap
between the rhetoric and the reality.
Administrators interested in bilingual programs should bear in mind
that Title VII is not the only source of monies available for bilingual
education. Many districts have operated bilingual programs through
Titles I and III of ESEA and with Model Cities monies. Then, again,
there is really no reason why school districts have to wait for federal
funding or legislation before they start fulfilling their reponsibility to
their communitiesto all members of their communities.
Possibly, the most direct evidence of lack of concern for this failure is
the unwillingness of school boards to use local funds to deal with these
problems. Consider a district in which 2% of the children have audiolog-
ical deficiencies while 15% have language problems arising from a differ-
ent cultural background. The district will hire therapists and aides for
the 2%, yet provide little or nothing for the 15%. Responsibility for the
inequities, though, does not lie only with the teacher because this is not a
pedagogical problem, but a question of educational policy. Districts in
which Puerto Rican students comprise one fourth, one third, or one half
of their total school population often do not see fit to spend an equiva-
lent proportion of their budget to meet the needs of those students. The
same thing can be said of representation on the local boards of educa-
tionespecially when members are appointed by the municipal authori-
ties. It would seem apt, although admittedly a radical notion, that in a
school district where the ethnic composition has changed from predomi-
nately Anglo-Saxon to Puerto Rican the content and style of educa-
tionas well as administrative and staffing patternsin the schools
would change accordingly. But radical notionsif they are to be respon-


[Page 261]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience243
siblerequire thinking through and school systems in the cities draw
their particular character from tradition closer to clubhouse politics
(which in political circles, in many places, was thought to be dead). This
one doesn't change the system, just the names by which the system
knows itself.
It is not always educators' altruism that is coming to the fore, how-
ever. Often, it is the controlling political groups who see that societal
peace is threatened and demand whatever school action is evident. This
political reality prompted recently a prominent Puerto Rican civic
leader to make the following observation:
For the past quarter of a century Puerto Rican students in the States have
been conditioned for the role of third-class citizens they will play in the
bigoted, prejudiced society in which we live.
The statement might not be entirely objective, and itmay or may not be
accurate in every sense, but the message is very clear.
The role of the school is seen as a reflection of themores of society.
Educators' perceptions, beliefs, and expectationsare manifest in the
structure and procedure of the school. The school sorts children into the
types necessary to fill the recurring status vacancies within society, and
Puerto Ricans are taught subordinate roles. While teachers show prefer-
ence for Anglos and regularly choose them for school leadership roles,
Puerto Rican children are tracked into redundancy and, when they
protest with non-performance, are despised as reprobates. While bigotry
and prejudice have no place in any part ofour country, the practice is
especially contemptible in American schools, for it is thesevery institu-
tions that, with "forked tongue,"teachthe story of democracy and equal
opportunity and thenactout patterns of individual and wholesale dis-
crimination.
So by "conditioning" the aforementioned spokesmanmeant that our
children are programmed to fail by culturally-biased schoolsystems
which subtly infer the children are inferior because theyare different. A
notion that is false. Both common sense andsome highly sophisticated
social science investigations thoroughly document the fact that learning
capacity has nothing to do with whereone is born. These children's lives
are scarred with failures, not because they are Puerto Rican, but because
:tiny are so badly educated and so poor. For it is lack of education with
its attendant poverty that has helped keep Puerto Ricans in the impossi-
ble situation they are in today.
The children are losing all hopes of learningor succeeding; the
schools are losing all hopes of teaching; and the nation is losing another
opportunity, perhaps itslast, to put flesh on the American dream.
Education offers the single best path out of poverty for thevast majority


[Page 262]
"Puerto Ricans realize that their culture is in danger of passing into oblivion unless
the home values, the traditions, the customs, and the language are retained."


[Page 263]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience245
of this country's poor, but educators are playing a losing game as long as
they persist in assuming that:
(1) the home culture is the cause of school failure
(2) the school is satisfactory as it is
(3) a principal function of the school is to Americanize foreign peo-
ples by eliminating their language and cultural orientation
Peddlers of that philosophy must be made aware that the traditional
"Americanization" approaches in education turn Puerto Ricans off.
Those who are proud to be U.S. citizens resent the connotation that that
approach carries. Those who resent U.S. citizenship, reject the approach
altogether. Puerto Ricans will cynically, and sometimes not so quietly,
describe such educational programs in poetic profanities.
This is a subtle but important point. "Citizenship" indoctrination has
created a state of an :-,alence within the Puerto Rican child. At school
he is told in essence: "Speak English: be American." At home in the
barrios, the appeal is different: "Don't forget whence you. :ome;don't
speak English around here!" This dilemma has often resulted in his
being a cultural schizophrenic in an effort to please both home and
school. As for the Puerto Rican who does become anglicized, he is often
lost to his community and culture. He has added to the brain drain out
of the barrio.
Puerto Ricans realize that their culture is in danger of passing into
oblivion unless the home values, the traditions, the customs, and the
language are retained. They are desperately trying to keep what they
have, and to regain that which they have lost through the acculturation
of the schools. Their spokesmen advance the model of a pluralistic,
egalitarian society in which ethnic minorities maintain and develop their
own cultural heritage. This does not imply that Puerto Rican children
will never become identified with Anglo values and life styles; it merely
states that they sl:Juld not have to do it at the expense of their identity
with their ethnic group. They should be given the opportunity to select
the best from both cultures and have life-style options open to them.
This is cultural democracy in action!


[Page 264]
246TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Suggested Teaching Strategies
by Elizabeth 0. Pearson*
Main Idea
A. Life in an urban neighborhood produces barriers which tend to limit inter-
action of those living in the neighborhood.
1. Charlotte L. Mayerson's Two Blocks Apart (New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1965), a story of Juan Gonzales and Peter Quinn who live in
close proximity in a New York neighborhood but have never met, is a
fascinating tale of life in a city. The book could be read to the class by
the teacher at junior high levels, or one or a group of students may wish
to read it. Discussion questions could focus around the reasons for the
lack of contact between two persons who live in such close physical
proximity. For example:
a. What are the life styles of Juan and Peter?
b. What qualities in Juan's life do you like? in Peter's?
c. What characteristics of Juan's life do you think Peter would like?
What in Peter's life do you think Juan would like?
d. What difficulties does Juan have because he is a Puerto Rican?
How does he deal with these difficulties?
e. Why do Juan and Peter have their own territories in their neighbor.
hoods?
2. So that students can understand more clearly the concept of territorial-
ity, have them plot, on a map of the general neighborhood around the
school, the way to school, the route to the home of a good friend, and
the way to a store that they visit frequently. Ask them if there are any
stores that are closer to their home than the one they visit, or if there is
a route they could take to school which would be shorter. Then ask them
why they don't take the shorter route or buy from the store nearer their
home. Perhaps a busy arterial street is a boundary or a large apartment
complex or a railroad track keeps them from taking a different route.
Psychological barriers could also exist, such as unfamiliarity with an-
other area or street. Compare their territorial boundaries to the ones
which Juan and Peter recognized.
3. Another case study of territoriality is seen in Spanish Harlem (New York:
Harper & Row, 1965) by Patricia Cayo Sexton. Her description of Puerto
Ricans, Blacks and Italians in East Harlem illustrates how different
* See page 117 for biographical sketch.


[Page 265]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience247
racial and ethnic groups coexist and interact in an urban setting. A
teacher might be interested in presenting this case study to the class
using an overhead transparency of a map of the neighborhood showing
the living area of each group. Territorial borders such as railroad tracks,
housing projects and a hill are evident in this neighborhood. The author
also provides a description of the culture of the Puerto Ricans which
can help students understand how a migrant group (remembering that
Puerto Ricans are American citizens) has adapted to the mainland and
at the same time maintained some of the customs of the island and its
lifestyles.
Main Idea
B. Because many Puerto Ricans are newcomers to the United States main-
land, cultural conflicts will occur between parents and children, and be-
tween Puerto Ricans and those persons already living in the neighborhood.
1. To help students understand how neighborhoods are affected by new
members and how Puerto Ricans are affected by living on the mainland
in urban areas, view the film "Ask Miguel" by Learning Corporation of
America. Then pose the following questions to students: What are the
consequences for Puerto Rican individuals and families living in a large
city such as New York in terms of:
a. what kind of housing is available.
b. what jobs will be available.
c. how well they can use English while maintaining the ability to speak
Spanish.
d. how schools will prepare Spanish-speaking students.
It is generally known that persons feel threatened when their way of life
is impinged upon. For example, ask students why:
a. apartment dwellers might panic when a Puerto Rican family moves
in.
b. older residents feel their jobs threatened by the newcomers.
c. older residents feel threatened when newcomers have a different
language.
d. schools don't attempt to work with Puerto Rican children in the
context of their own culture and language instead of expecting them
immediately to be able to function in the classroom.
Cultural conflict will occur when any new group moves into an estab-
lished residential area. Puerto Ricans are newcomers to the mainland
and are undergoing similar difficulties that other groups have encoun
tered. "The Adjustment of Puerto Ricans to New York City" by Joseph
Fitzpatrick in Minorities in a Changing World (New York: Alfred A.


[Page 266]
248TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Knopf, 1967), edited by Milton L. Barron, is a useful reference for
teachers to explain why older residents feel anxiety over the arrival of
newcomers, in this case, Puerto Ricans.
2. Cultural conflict is based on a difference in values. After students have
done the previous activity, ask them to determine the values of the two
groups, Puerto Ricans new to the mainland and established residents.
Students might be asked to state the values they think are exemplified
by the two groups. They may suggest security and cultural pride as two
values. After the list is made, ask students to apply them to the appro-
priate group. Security might be applied to both groups while cultural
pride could relate to the Puerto Rican group. A chart such as the
following might be useful.
ValuesPuerto RicansEstablished Residents
SecurityX X
Cultural PrideX
StabilityX
3. Student awareness of cultural conflict can be increased by making
students more aware of their own feelings. The teacher can ask ques-
tions to which students should respond privately. Questions such as the
following should help students probe their own feelings without having
to publicly state them.
a. How do you react when you hear someone speaking a foreign lan-
guage?
b. How do you feel when a new student from a different cultural back-
ground is assigned to your classroom?
c. Are you aware of the presence of persons with a racial background
different from yours? What do you think about when you recognize
this awareness?
d. How do you feel when you are visiting someone with customs and
traditions different from yours?
These responses should be filed in a place where others will have no
access to them. They may be taken out two or three months later so that
students may note if their feelings have changed.
Main Idea
C. Life in Puerto Rico provides a contrast with life on the mainland.
1. So that students may become more aware of characteristics of life in
Puerto Rico and compare and contrast them with, for example, life in
New York City, ask students to look at a map of the Western Hemisphere


[Page 267]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience249
to determine the location of Puerto Rico. They also should compare the
land size of Puerto Rico with New York City and the population of each
place. Comparisons can also be made of climate and major industries.
They might look for personal accounts of life in Puerto Rico from books
in the library and persons who could speak to the class about life in
Puerto Rico.
After this data is obtained, one group of students could write a
narrative about life in Puerto Rico and another group about life in New
York City. Photographs and student illustrations should accompany the
narratives.
2. Reasons for Puerto Rican migration to the mainland are made clearer
when students are familiar with the history of Puerto Rico. A book such
as Puerto Rico: A Profile by Kal Wagenheim (New York: Praeger, 1970)
is an informative history for junior high and high school students. Of
particular value to the high school student is Francesco Cordasco and
Eugene Bucchioni, The Puerto Rican Experience (Totowa, New Jersey:
Littlefield and Adams, 1972), which is a paperback collection of read-
ings. After students familiarize themselves with the history of Puerto
Rico, they could focus on the following questions in a panel discussion.
a. What are some comparisons and contrasts between the kind of gov-
ernance which has characterized Puerto Rico and the U. S.?
b. How has Puerto Rico broken away from its Spanish ties?
c. How has its relationship with the U. S. affected its development?
d. What are the present economic conditions in Puerto Rico?


[Page 268]
250TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
FOOTNOTES
' The composite student portrait derives from F. Cordasco and E. Bucchioni, The Puerto
Rican Community and Its Children on the Mainland: A Sourcebook for Teachers. Social
Workers and other Professionals (New York: Scarecrow Press, 2nd edition, 1972); and
from Richard J. Margolis, The Losers: A Report on Puerto Ricans and the Public Schools
(New York: Aspira, 1968).
For the economic realities of employment, housing, and general participation- by
Puerto Ricans on the mainland, see Joseph P. Fitzpatrick, Puerto Rican Americans
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1971).
' See F. Cordasco, "Poor Children and Schools," in W. W. Brickman and S. Lehrer, eds.,
Education and the Many Faces of the Disadvantaged (New York: John Wiley, 1972).
which is a critique-review of the extensive literature on the subject.
'See, generally, M. Fantini and G. Weinstein, The Disadvantaged (New York: Harper
& Row, 1968); and F. Cordasco, "Educational Pelagianism: The School and the Poor,"
Teachers College Record, vol. 69 (April 1968), pp. 705-709.
' See Mary Finocchiaro, Teaching English as a Second Language, Rev. ed. (New York:
Harper & Row, 1969).
Finocchiaro, op. cit., discusses the concept, passim.
' For "bilingualism" and its varied connotations, see F. Cordasco, "The Challenge of the
Non-English Speaking Child in the American School," School & Soceity (March 30, 1968),
pp 198-201.
' See Vera P. John and Vivian M. Homer, Early Childhood Bilingual Education (New
York: Modem Language Association, 1971).
' For commentary on this important concept, see Manuel Maldonado Denis, Puerto
Rico: Una Interpretacion Historico-Social (Mexico City: Editores Siglo XXI, 1969).
' For Title VII, see F. Cordasco, "The Bilingual Education Act," Phi Delta Kappan
(October 1969), and !dem, Footnote *7.
" See, for grants under Title VII, "Bilingualism," The Center Forum, vol. 4 (September
1969), the entire issue of which is devoted to analysis of funded programs.
For community participation, see Harry M. Levin, ed., Community Control of School..
(Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1970), which is much more than its title suggests;
and Reconnection for Learning: A Community School System for New York City (New
York: Praeger, 1969), which was the report to Mayor John Lindsay on the decentralization
of the city's schools. The report's recommendations were not implemented, and the report
is, at the present time, the most comprehensive study of urban schools and strategies for
community participation. See also Leonard Covello, Teacher in the Urban Community: A
Half Century in City Schools (New York: Littlefield & Adams, 1970).
"For an expression of the Puerto Rican new militancy, see Juan A. &len, We, The
Puerto Rican People: A Story of Oppression and Resistance (New York: Monthly Review
Press, 1971).
"See, generally, Title VI, Civil Rights Act.
"This was made eminently clear as early as 1968. See Hemos Trabajado Bien: A Report
on the First National Conference of Puerto Ricans, Mexican Americans and Educators on
the Special Educational Needs of Puerto Rican Youth (New York: Aspira, 1968).
"See F. Cordasco, "Educational Enlightenment out of Texas: Toward Bilingualism,"
Teachers College Record, vol. 71 (May 1970), pp. 608-612.


[Page 269]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience251
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General Bibliographies
Cordasco, Francesco with Eugene Bucchioni and Diego Castellanos. Puerto Ricans on the
United States Mainland: A Bibliography of Reports, Texts, Critical Studies and Related
Materials. Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman & Littlefield, 1972. An annotated bibliogra-
phy of 754 main entries dealing with bibliographical resources; the migration to the
mainland; the island experience; conflict and acculturation on the mainland; education
on the mainland; and social needs encompassing health, housing, employment, and
other human needs.
Cordasco, Francesco and Leonard Covello. Studies of Puerto Rican Children in American
Schools: A Preliminary Bibliography. New York: Department of Labor, Migration
Division, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 1967. (Some 450 entries.) Also published in
Education Libraries Bulletin, Institute of Education, University of London, #31 (Spring
1968), pp. 7-33; and in Journal of Human Relations, vol. 16 (1968), pp. 264-285.
Cordasco, Francesco. The People of Puerto Rico: A Bibliography. New York: Department
of Labor, Migration Division, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (1968). (Some 500 en-
tries.)
Dossick, Jesse. Doctoral Research on Puerto Rico and Puerto Ricans. New York: New
York University, School of Education, 1967. A classified list of 320 doctor J disserta-
tions completed at American mainland universities.
General Studies
Burma, John H. Spanish-Speaking Groups in the United States. Duke University Press,
1954. Includes a sketch of "the Puerto Ricans in New York" (pp. 156-187). Burma
assumes that there is a fundamental "unity of culture" among diverse groups because
they speak the same language. In light of the widely differing historical backgrounds
which have given rise to different cultures among Spanish-speaking groups, the assump-
tion does not seem valid.
Chenault, Lawrence. The Puerto Rican Migrant in New York City. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1938. Reissued with a New Foreword by F. Cordasco. New York:
Russell & Russell, 1970. The one book that puts together data available on the early
movements to New York City of Puerto Rican migrants. Includes a discussion of the
various ways these movements affect the Jstablished community and the migrants.
Cordasco, F. and David Alloway. "Spanish-Speaking People in the United States: Some
Research Constructs and Postulates," International Migration Review, vol. 4 (Spring
1970), pp. 76-79.
Fitzpatrick, Joseph P. Puerto Rican Americans: The Meaning of Migration to the Main-
land. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971. An overview and trenchant study
with materials on the dynamics of migration: the problem of identity; the family;
problem of color; religion; education; welfare. See New York Times, September 12,
1971, p. 96.
Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan. "The Puerto Ricans." In: Beyond the Melting
Pot: The Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians, and Irish of New York City, by Nathan
Glazer and Daniel Moynihan. Cambridge: M.I.Teand Harvard University Press, 2nd
ed., 1970. Puerto Ricans in New York City are discussed in terms of who migrates to the
United States; their relationship to the island of Puerto Rico; business, professional,
labor opportunities, and average earnings in New York; and the effect of migration on
the culture of the migrants.
Lewis, Oscar. La Vida: A Puerto Rican Family in the Culture of PovertySan Juan and
New York. New York: Random House, 1966. Begins with a long introduction which
describes Lewis' methods, the setting, and the family Involved in the study. A discussion
of the theory of the "culture of poverty" is included. The rest of the book is the story of


[Page 270]
1
252TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
a Puerto Rican family, as told by the members of the nuclear family and some of their
relatives and friends. See also Oscar Lewis. A Study of Slum Culture: Backgrounds for
La Vida. New York: Random House, 1968. Provides the general background, data, and
statistical frame of reference for La Vida.
Mills, C. Wright; Clarence Senior; and Rose Goldsen. The Puerto Rican Journey: New
York's Newest Migrant. Harper, 1950. Reissued, New York: Russell & Russell, 1969. A
carefully researched field study of the Puerto Rican population in two coreareas of New
York City. Although many of its statistics are now out-of-date, the book deals with basic
concepts, such as the factors in "adaptation," cultural and language differences, and
their influence on the progress and problems of the migrants.
Puerto Rican Community Development Project. Puerto Rican Forum (New York), 1964.
This report highlights the problemsincome, housing, education, family, etc.that
confront the Puerto Rican community in New York City, though not all of its popula-
tion. Data are presented to support the thesis that Puerto Ricans generally are not well
off and need to make much more rapid gains in a contemporary, technical, urban society
such as New York. Read from the point of view of its purpose, it is an illuminating
study.
"(The) Puerto Rican Experience on the United States Mainland," International Migration
Review, vol. II (Spring 1968). Entire issue devoted to a comprehensive account of the
experience.
Sexton, Patricia. Spanish Harlem: Anatomy of Poverty. Harper .& Row, 1965. Report bya
sociologist who spent part of two years "getting acquainted" with East Harlem. Shows
awareness that she is dealing with the pathologies of a minority of the area's population
("still, the majority of the people are self-supporting"). However, she does not glossover
the problems that confront many of the self-supporting, low-income urban dwellers. The
book is informed by the important insight of the need for "the poor" to be involved in
working out their destiny.
Education
Anderson, Virginia. 'Teaching English to Puerto Rican Pupils," High Points (March
1964), pp. 51-54.
Bilingual Education: Hearings, U.S. Senate, Committee on Labor and Public Welfare.
Special Sub-Committee on Bilingual Education, 90th Congress, 1st Session. Washing-
ton: U.S. Government Printing Office, Part I, May 1967; Part II, June 1967. On Title
VII (Elementary and Secondary Education Act) which was enacter' in 1968.
"Bilingualism," The Center Forum, vol. 4 (September 1969). Entire issue is given to
analysis of Title VII (Elementary, and Secondary, Education Act) programs and related
matters. Includes an important annotated bibliography.
Bucchioni, Eugene. A Sociological Analysis of the Functioning of Elementary Education
for Puerto Rican Children in the New York City Public Schools. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, New School for Social Research, 1965.
Cordasco, Francesco. "The Puerto Rican Child in the American School." American
Sociological Association Abstract of Papers, 61st Annual Meeting (1966), pp. 23-24.
Cordasco, Francesco. "Puerto Rican Pupils and American Education," School & Society,
vol. 95 (February, 18, 1967), pp. 116-119. Also, with some change, in Journal of Negro
Education (Spring 1967); and Kansas Journal of Sociology, vol. 2 (Spring 1966), pp. 59-
65.
Cordasco, Francesco. "The Challenge of the Non-English-Speaking Child in the American
School," School & Society, vol. 96 (March 30, 1968), pp. 198-201. On the proposal for
the enactment of the Bilingual Education Act (Title VII, Elementary and Secondary
Education Act), with historical background.
Cordasco, Francesco. "Educational Pelagianism: The Schools and the Poor," Teachers
College Record, vol. 69 (April 1968), pp. 705-709.


[Page 271]
Teaching the Puerto Rican Experience253
Cordasco, Francesco and Eugene Bucchioni. The Puerto Rican Community of Newark,
N.J.: An Educational Program for Its Children. Newark: Board of Education, Summer
1970. A detailed report on the implementation of a program for Puerto Rican students.
Cordasco, Francesco and Eugene Bucchioni. Education Programs for Puerto Rican Stu-
dents. (Jersey City Public Schools.) Evaluation and Recommendations. Jersey City:
Board of Education, 1971.
Cordasco, F. and Eugene Bucchioni. Newark Bilingual Education Program, 1970-1971.
Newark: Board of Education, 1971. Evaluation report of a massive program for Puerto
Rican students.
Cordasco, Francesco and Eugene Bucchiom. The Puerto Rican Community and Its Chil-
dren on the Mainland: A Sourcebook for Teachers, Social Workers and other Profes-
sionals. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 2nd ed., 1972. "The original structuring of the
text has been retained, and it is within this framework that new matenals have been
interpolated. New materials have been added to Part I (Aspects of Puerto Rican
Culture) whose basic design is to afford a politico-cultural kaleidoscope of island life; to
Part II (The Puerto Rican Family), bringing into clear focus the family's transition to
mainland life; to Part III (The Puerto Rican Experience on the Mainland: Conflict and
Acculturation), in bringing into sharp view the new politicization of the mainland
experience; and in Part IV (The Puerto Rican Experience on the Mainland: Puerto
Rican Children in North American Schools) in affording additional materials on bilin-
gual education and in providing outlines for course content and staff- training. Ap-
pended to the bibliography are selected additional references." (Preface to the 2nd ed.)
Cordasco, Francesco and Eugene Bucchioni. "A Staff Institute for Teachers of Puerto
Rican Students," School & Society, vol. 99 (Summer 1972).
Diaz, Manuel and Roland Cintron. School Integration and Quality Education. New York:
Puerto Rican Forum, 1964.
Hemos Trabajado Bien. A Report on the First National Conference of Puerto Ricans,
Mexican-Americans and Educators on the Special Educational Needs of Puerto Rican
Youth. New York: Aspira, 1968. Includes a series of recommendations.
John, Vera P. and Vivian M. Horner. Early Childhood Bilingual Education. New York:
Modern Language Association, 1971. Invaluable. Includes a "Typology of Bilingual
Education Models"; excellent documentation and bibliography.
Margolis, Richard J. The Losers: A Report on Puerto Ricans and the Public Schools. New
York: Aspira, 1%8. An important report on visits to a number of schools with descrip-
tion and evaluation of programs for Puerto Rican children.
(Puerto Rican Children) "Education of Puerto Rican Children in New York City," The
Journal of Educational Sociology, vol. 28 (December 1954), pp. 145-192. An important
collection of articles.
Morrison, J. Cayce, Director. The Puerto Rican Study: 1953-57. New York City Board of
Education, 1958. Final report of the most complete study of the impact of Puerto Rican
migration on the public schools of New York City, and how schools were affecting
Puerto Rican children and their parents. Specialized studies were done within the
framework of the large-scale study. These smaller studies focused on the "sociocultural
adjustment" of the children and their parents, and digests are presented in final report.
About a third of the book deals with the special non-English-speaking program devel-
oped by the city school system. Descnption of some of the methods and materials
developed is included. Reissued with an introductory essay by F. Cordasco (New York:
Oriole Editions, 1972).


[Page 272]
Part Three
TEACHING ABOUT
WHITE ETHNIC GROUPS
AND WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Parts One and Two of this book explore the problems of ethnic minority
groups and suggest ways in which the classroom teacher can incorporate
their cultures into the social studies curriculum. While Black, Red,
Brown and Yellow peoples are victims of the most harsh kinds of
dehumanization in America, other groups within our society also experi-
ence discrimination and cultural assaults. White ethnic groups and
women often encounter problems in America which must be honestly
dealt with by every teacher whO is committed to making America an
open society. We are defining an open society as one ;.1 which individu-
als from diverse ethnic, cultural and social class groups have equal
opportunities to participate. Today, white ethnics and women are often
denied opportunities because of the groups to which they belong. Part
Three focuses on the problems of these groups and suggests ways in
which information about them can and should be incorporated into the
social studies program.
Recently, the concept of white ethnicity has evoked a great deal of
concern and controversy. The popularity of Novak's The Rise of the
Unmeltable Ethnics reflects this concern. Perhaps the most important
question which has arisen for educators is "Should the concept be
studied in the schools?" In the first chapter, Mark Krug provides a
perceptive analysis of this and other important questions concerning
white ethnics. He presents a strong argument for including a study of
,white ethnic groups in the social studies and discusses some issues and
problems which should be investigated, including the melting pot theory
254


[Page 273]
Teaching About White Ethnic Groups and Women's Rights255
and the relationship between ethnic identification and political partici-
pation. He argues that the study of ethnicity and politics is one of the
most promising yet neglected topics for students to pursue. While Krug
believes that white ethnics should be studied, he warns that such study
might have some negative consequences. The reader should note the
conflicting perceptions presented by Sizemore in Part One and those
discussed by Krug regarding the melting pot theory.
The roles and perceptions of women in America must be changed,
argues Janice Law Trecker in the final chapter. She contends that the
social studies teacher has a special responsibility to help shatter perva-
sive stereotypes about women, and suggests some promising ways in
which this might be done. Trecker documents how women have been
written out of American history, and offers some concrete and highly
useful suggestions as to how they can be put into proper perspective.
Trecker's arguments merit deep pondering. Sexism, like racism, is a
debilitating and destructive social phenomenon that is deeply rooted in
the American experience. It must be decisively and massively attacked
by those with vision.
"White ethnic groups and women
often encounter problems in Amer-
ica which must be honestly dealt
with by every teacher...."


[Page 274]
Mark M. Krug
MARK M. KRUG is Professor of Education in History and the Social
Sciences at the University of Chicago: He graduated from Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, and received his M.A. degree from Roosevelt
University and his Ph.D. in history from the University of Chicago.
Professor Krug was formerly a high school social studies teacher. His
articles have appeared in a wide variety ofjournals, including the Amer-
ican Historical Review, Harvard Educational Review, School Review,
the Journal of Negro History and Social Education. He is the author of
Lyman TrumbullConservative Radical, Aneurin BevanCautious
Rebel, History and the Social Sciences: New Approaches to the Teach-
ing of Social Studies, What Will Be TaughtThe Next Decade and
White Ethnic Groups: Unity in Diversity, and coeditor of The New
Social Studies: Analysis of Theory and Materials.
256


[Page 275]
MARK M. KRUG
11
Teaching the Experience
of White Ethnic Groups
A respected newspaper columnist, Garry Wills, suggested in a recent
column that talk about white ethnic politics is a horrendous hoax,
perpetuated by crafty politicians on the unsuspecting American public.'
He charged that ethnic politics, instead of promoting pluralistic variety,
"flattens people out in racial stereotypes." He concluded that fundamen-
tally, racism is the basis for the newly discovered consciousness among
the white ethnic groups. "If you take away racial rivalry and envy, that
is claims that blacks (or Poles) are genetically inferior, WASPc (or
Irishmen or Jews) are genetically superior," Wills wrote, "what we get is
one cultural influence interacting with a thousand others, with unpre-
dictable results in each individual." Wills, and others who share his
view, maintain that white Americans, with few exceptions, are so ethni-
cally and culturally intermingled that ethnicity and ethnic voting blocs
are largely figments of fertile imaginations.
On the other hand, spokesmen for various white ethnic minorities
speak repeatedly about the "death" or "the failure of the American
Melting Pot Theory." The British poet and essayist W. H. Auden, who,
after many years of residence in New York, moved to Oxford, asked in a
touching farewell to his adopted city: "Whoever invented the myth that
America is a melting pot? It is nothing of the kind and, as a lover of
diversity, I say thank God. The Po:es, the Ukrainians, the Italians, the
Jews, the Puerto Ricans, who are my neighbors, may not be the same as
they would be in another country, but they keep their own characteris-
tics."' Monsignor Geno Baroni, Director of the National Center for
257


[Page 276]
,)
258TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Urban Ethnic Studies, who on another occasion stated that America is
in the process of becoming a "multi-ethnic society," appealed in a recent
speech to a conference of black and white ethnic leaders for "a new
American dreamthe urban ethnic pluralistic society." He predicted
that "white, middle American ethnics will set the agenda for the nine-
teen-seventies."'
At the same conference which was intended to forge a united front of
blacks, Puerto Ricans and white ethnics in order to get a bigger slice of
the economic and political pie, the black civil rights leader Bayard
Rustin declared that "there never was a melting pot. There never will be
a melting pot. If there ever were, it would be such a tasteless soup that
we would have to go and start all over."'
Murray Friedman of the American Jewish Committee, a prestigious
Jewish communal organization, argued in an essay published in the
book Overcoming Middle-Class Rage' that "America is going through a
period of re-ethnication." Some voices have been raised questioning the
wisdom of accentuating ethnic differences. Naomi Bliven, in a percep-
tive review of a book of another leading exponent of ethnicity, Andrew
Greeley, wrote in the New Yorker Magazine: "He (Greeley) extols
pluralism and diversity, but his system of multiple apartheid promises
that Americans tucked into ethnic and racial Bantustans would encoun-
ter not diversity but homogeneity."6
What is one to make out of these sharply conflicting views? The first
step would be to reject some of the obviously exaggerated assumptions
of both sidesand then to sort out the many separate issues which have
become entangled in the thicket of the debate on ethnicity. After this is
done we must weigh soberly those problems which deserve serious
consideration. The repeated statements of the leaders of the white ethnic
minorities about the death or the failure of the melting pot idea can be
dismissed as rather obvious maneuvers aimed at attention-getting at
gatherings of the various ethnic groups. On the other hand, one can not
quarrel with Bayard Rustin and other black spokesmen who speak with
derision and contempt about the melting pot concept. For blacks, the
melting pot theory is so much nonsense. They have not melted into the
American society. The white dominant society not only has failed to
make reasonable efforts to eradicate the barriers between the whites and
the blacks after the abolition of slavery but on the contrary erected legal
bard: s to segregate the races. Until recently many states south and
north of the Mason-Dixon line had laws which forbade interracial
marriages. The relation of the blacks and to a large extent of the
Spanish-Americans, the Chinese, and the Japanese to the concept of the
American melting pot is sui generis and ought not to be lumped together
with that of the white ethnic groups.


[Page 277]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups259
The black and the Chicano communities present a variety of unique
problems which do not apply to the white ethnic minorities. These
problems are the result of their history and the color of their skin. A
Pole, if he wishes, can lose the special characteristics of his particular
ethnic group and literally lose himself in the general dor-inant society,
but a black, with the exception of those few who are extremely light-
skinned, cannot doIt makes little sense, therefore, to treat the
concepts of ethnic identity and of the melting pot, or of cultural plural-
ism as if they relate in the same way to white and non-white ethnics.
There is room for debate as to the degree to which the melting pot has
succeeded in the various white ethnic groups, but, as far as the blacks
are concerned, the melting pot theory is irrelevant.
But in spite of tIr proclamations issued at regular intervals by the
leaders of the.white ethnic groups that "the melting poi myth is dead,"
the fact is that the American melting pot worked, on the whole, remark-
ably well. It is estimated that the United States had absorbed between
the years 1880 and 1920 over forty million immigrants mainly from
Ireland, Scandinavia, Central and Eastern Europe. Millions of children
and grandchildren of these former Poles, Irishmen, Germans, Italians,
Swedes and others have indeed "melted" and consider themselves, and
are considered by others, "just Americans." The descendants of the
4


[Page 278]
260TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
American society of the decades preceding the period of large immigra-
tion and the descendants of the hundreds of thousands of the pioneers
who have settled in the vast Western frontier areas have also, with few
exceptions, shed any ties they had with their respective ethnic communi-
ties. Figures on the existing white ethnic groups are all rough estimates
but even if we assume that there are today forty million ethnics, plus
twenty million blacks and ten million Spanish-Americans, that still
leaves over 130 million people in America who are quite indifferent to
their ethnic origins.
In addition, there is an infinite variety of modes of identification, even
among those who keep some ties to their respective ethnic groups.
Andrew M. Greeley, the foremost expert on the Irish in America, has
repeatedly asserted that the Irish can no longer be considered a separate
ethnic group in America. Teddy Kennedy, Richard Daley and Mike
Mansfield are "Irish" but that identification, as is true for millions of
Irish-Americans, means little more than a few ethnic sentimental attach-
ments. The variety of ways in which the five million American Jews
identify with their ethnic group suggests how unwise it is to generalize
about the effectiveness of the melting pot theory. Whatever can be said
about the religious and cultural values that bind Jews into a recogniz-
able ethnic group, they are American Jews and they little resemble the
Jewish immigrants who came to this c. entry around 1900.
In general, it can safely be postulated that Monsignor Baroni is
mistaken in his assumption that America is on the way to becoming a
"multi-ethnic society." The United States will not become a modern
version of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. In an important sense, it is the
general effectiveness of the melting pot theory which makes such a
balkanization of America impossible. Soccer, in spite of all of the efforts
of the ethnics, has not taken root in America and has not been a
challenge to baseball and football. Spokesmen for the white ethnics
seem to forget that outside of the large urban centers in the East and a
few cities in California, the issue of ethnicity and ethnic separatism is
non-existent and irrelevant. This includes most of the South, the Mid-
west (with the exception of Chicago and Milwaukee), and the Far West.
The same is true eves, on the Eastern Seaboard. Of course, there are
several million Poles, Dutch, Irish and Italians in Pennsylvania and in
Massachusetts but the bulk of the population of these states has no
separate ethnic identity.
America, in fact, owes a debt of gratitude to the inventors of the
melting pot theory. How otherwise could a young nation like the United
States have absorbed such a large and unprecedented influx of immi-
grants from so many countries, speaking so many languages, worshiping
in so many different ways, and still survived as a united country? It was


[Page 279]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups261
indeed the theoryor rather the social outlookthat resulted from the
melting pot idea that greatly minimized the deep political, religious, and
cultural cleavages among the various immigrantgroups and virtually
forced public opinion-makers to frown on too much emphasison reli-
gious and ethnic separateness. The stresson American unity and the
conscious attempt to ignore or to minimize the ethnic backgrounds of
the children of the immigrants made it possible for thousands of able
sons and daughters of the newcomers to rise rapidly to positions of
prominence in business, government, education and the professions.
Greeley in Why Can't They Be Like Us?' and other writerson "new
ethnicity" wrote with derision about the often crude attempts to "Ameri-
canize" the immigrants by forcing them to resembleas quickly as possi-
ble the.ninant Anglo-Saxon society. There isno doubt that the
process of socialization of the immigrants to the new American environ-
ment included a large dose of contempt and hostility for the ethniC
sensibilities and values of the immigrants. Few ofus now believe that
Americans generally welcomed the successivewaves of immigrants. This
myth started in schools where children were taught to recite the lines
from the poem of Emma Lazarus, which are inscribedon the Statue of
Liberty:
Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
I lift my lamp beside the eden door!
These are beautiful words and fine sentiments, but they do notcorre-
spond to historical reality. In truth, Americans did not welcome the tired
and the poor immigrants and were often terrified by the "wretched
refuse of Eurci,e.
Leaders of industry wanted the immigrantsas a much needed labor
force, but a considerable portion of the population mistrusted, ridiculed
and feared the immigrants. The descendants of the earlier immigrants
feared that the huge numbers of immigrants would change the American
way of life and more importantly bring into the country the intensity of
their ancient feuds. Heeding the advice of George Washington, they
wanted no involvement in the "mess of Europe." They cherished the
ideal picture of the new American, so well painted by Jean de Creve-
coeur in his famous Letters from an American Farmer, published in
1782:
He is an American, who, leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and
manners, receives new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced...


[Page 280]
7,.
"In truth, Americans did not welcome the tired and the poor immigrants... ."


[Page 281]
1
Teaching the Ejcperience of White Ethnic Groups263
Unwanted and bewildered, the newcomers sought a measure of comfort
and security by settling in the neighborhoods of their compatriots. In
this manner, ethnic neighborhoods were established. But it would be
wrong to disregard the fact that the overwhelming majority of the
immigrants were eager to shed their ethnic identity and heritage and to
blend as rapidly as possible into the dominant society and its values and
mores.
Many leaders of white ethnics disparage the record of the public
schools in relation to the children of various ethnic groups. It is true that
some teachers showed little respect for the values held dearly by the
children of the new immigrants. But on the other hand, the public
schools did a magnificent job of molding and adjusting millions of
immigrant children to their new role as citizens of the new country.
Public schools were the basic workshops of American democracy. It is in
schools that children of many racial, ethnic and religious origins learned,
however painfully, to live together and to take advantage of the precious
gifts of American freedom. Subsequently, the public schools made it
possible for thousands of Jewish, Polish; Italian and German children to
attain positions of prominence in all walks of life.
There seems to be a serious contradiction in the recent movement for
re-ethnization. On one hand, the leaders of the white ethnic minorities
speak about the need for solidarity between the blacks and white ethnics
who have long been deprived of their political rights andmany eco-
nomic benefits, and on the other hand, the new ethnic consciousness has
a significant racist origin. The Catholic National Center of Urban Af-
fairs and the American Jewish Committee have sponsored in recent
years a number of conferences bringing together blacks, Chicanos, Jews,
Italian-Americans, Polish-Americans and other ethnic groups, in order
to forge a common front and a common cause. In one such recent
conference one speaker began his speech by asking: "Can we develop a
political majoritywhites, ethnics, browns, blacks to reorder thena-
tional priorities?"'
But it is also generally conceded, even by the spokesmen of the white
ethnics, that the revival of ethnic solidarity stems ina large measure
from the rivalry with, and the, fear of, the blacks in the large urban
centers. There is, in many cities, the making of a white ethnic-black
confrontation which stems primarily from the residential pattern of the
various ethnic blocs and from economic competition for the same jobs.
Barbara Mikulski, a Polish-American leader and a member of the Balti-
more City Council, stated on several occasions that the black-ethnic
antagonism has its roots from their fight "for the same urban turf."
Many Poles and Italians who do not have the money to buy homes in
the suburbs feel threatened by the blacks who want to move into their


[Page 282]
264 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
neighborhoods. White ethnic leaders openly suggest that the Federal
Government spends an inordinate amount of money and effort to help
the blacks butsdoes nothing for the so-called white Middle-Americans.
Monsignor Baroni made an astonishingly frank statement on this point.
He was quoted in Newsweek Magazine as having said: "The ethnics
were taught that they would get their slice of the American dream in a
matter of time if they only stayed quiet. But it didn't turn out that way.
The ethnics felt that the blacks were getting what they needed but that
the ethnics were paying for it. Now the ethnics are asking for their own
slice." It is difficult to see how Father Baroni can hope to build a
solidarity front with blacks on this type of reasoning.
In Newark, where blacks comprise a majority of the population and
where Italians are the largest white ethnic minority, the relations be-
tween these two major blocs are strained to the point of explosion. 1
black majority on the school board ordered the display of the black
national flag in all the school rooms and Susan Barone, a teacher and a
leader in the powerful Italian North Ward Organization, told a New
_York Times reporter, "Now we are beginning to insist on our share. For
better or worse, the old ideal of the melting pot is dead around here. The
kids in school today don't want to be known as Americans but as
Italians."'
The demands of blacks for a share of jobs on local and federal levels
have spurred similar demands from Italians and Poles for jobs in city
and state governments, and especially in big city school systems. The
Irish and the Jews have not voiced these demands because their propor-
tion in governmental positions and in the school system has been high,
and any demand for racial ethnic quotas could seriously diminish their
present proportion of jobs. There is no minimizing the growing fear and
antagonism of Jews in New York, Chicago, Boston 'and other cities who
are threatened with the loss of jobs as teachers and principals. jobs
which they won in tough competitive examinations. On the other hand,
blacks, and now Poles, Italians, and Chicanos are asking for a redress
for a long history of job discrimination.
There is a dilemma in this issue, a dilemma which will grow as the
white ethnic groups voice even more vigorously their demands for their
share of jobs. The problem is not only a social one of equal treatment
for all, but also a constitutional one. In all of the discussion of ethnic
quotas a point which was well defined by Naomi Bliven seems to be
overlooked. "But the main difficulty," she wrote, "in emphasizing, per-
petuating, or even having respect for ethnic and racial differences within
.,this country is simply that our state and federal constitutions, our public
Newsweek, April 3, 1972, p. 86. Copyright Newsweek, Inc. 1972, reprinted by permis-
sion.


[Page 283]
1.171
4'sssle-444skr-s`t_s-
k's
zre.z;-;,y.;"
_
".
"Human beings are not metal and do not melt.... Ethnicity remains an important
force in American society...."


[Page 284]
266TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
institutions, and the spirit of our laws have always been opposed to such
divisions.'
Here is the grave dilemma. While quotas and the abandonment of
rigid and equitable filling of jobs on the basis of qualifications alone
ought to be avoided as iniquitous and self-defeatingsome way must be
found to redress the old pattern of job discrimination against blacks and
members of some white ethnic minorities. The solution will be difficult.
What will probably happen is that, in a typically pragmatic American
way, federal and local jobs will be given more and more often to
eminently qualified persons who happen to be black or are of Polish or
Italian origin.
We have made the point that there is little evidence to suggest that the
melting pot theory has been a total failure. But it is true that the melting
pot concept did not work as well as its originator, the British-Jewish
writer Israel Zangwill, thought that it would. Similarly, the predictions
of some of America's sociologists, including Talcotr Parsons and Louis
Wirth, who were sure that ethnic differences would disappear in the
third generation of immigrants, also proved to be incorrect. The reason
is rather simple. Human beings are not metal and do not melt, at least
not easily and not completely. Eth "icity remains an important force in
American society, and while most children of immigrants have assimi-
lated, millions of white ethnics were and are determined to preserve their
identity and cultural heritage. In our free society, they must be allowed
to do this.
America is n,,t becoming a federation of ethnic groups and the re-
awakening of ethnic solidarity is limited both in scope and in area but
ethnic politics are a reality in this country. The existence of ethnic voting
blocs is not a hoax invented by some politicians as Garry Wills has
suggested. On the contrary, in view of the generally close elections for
the Presidency and for many seats in the House of Representatives and
the Senate, the influence of ethnic voting can hardly be exaggerated, and
it surely can no longer be ignored by political scientists and by secon-
dary school and university teachers.
Why political scientists and civics textbooks have for so long over-
looked the impact of ethnic politics is difficult to understand because the
phenomenon is quite visible even to cursory examination. Everybody
active in politics 'n Rhode Island knows that the two Senate seats_for
that state are likely to reflect the two largest voting blocs, WASPs and
Italians. The st-ite is now represented by Senators Claiborne Pell and
John Pastore. Similarly New Mexico apparently has to have an "Anglo"
Senator and a Chicano. Clinton Anderson and Joseph Montoya are the
present Senators from New Mexico. There are Congressional districts in
Minnesota that apparently only a Swede or a Norwegian can represent


[Page 285]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups267
in Congress and similarly several districts inNorthwest Chicago and
South Milwaukee are always represented bymen with names like Ros-
tenkowski, Kluczynski or Zablocki. Thesame is true in many other
Congressional districts in New York, Connecticut, NewJersey and other
states.
The primary elections in Illinois in March, 1972 providea classic
demonstration of the existence and the influence of ethnicbloc voting in
large urban centers. The primaries were deemedvery important because
an indicted States Attorney, Robert Hanrahan, who was dumped by
Mayor Daley's Democratic machine, ran against Judge Raymond Berg,
the candidate of the regular organization, and against DonaldMoore,
an independent liberal candidate. Hanrahan, who was indicted foran
alleged conspiracy to suppress evidence ina raid on the headquarters of
the Black Panthers, ran strictlyas a "law and order" man. In the
.election campaign, Hanrahan was portrayedas the savior of the white
community from black extremists.
An analysis of the voting results in the city wards showed that the
Polish and Italian voters went solidly for Hanrahan and assured his
sensational victory. The Irish vote was split, largely becauseof loyalty to
Richard Daley and the efforts of his Irish lieutenants. Negro districts
went for the regular candidate, Judge Berg, and the sizeable Jewish
population voted overwhelmingly for the liberal independent candidate,
Donald Moore. Moore carried eight wards in Chicago and, without
exception, all these wards havea substantial Jewish population. The
same Illinois Presidential primary gave a victory to Edmund Muskie
because Chicago's Poles voted for him, hopingto have the first Polish-
American in the White House.
Similarly, in the 1970 elections for New York State, Nelson Rockefel-
ler was elected by defeating the Democratic candidate because,as an
analysis of voting results disclosed, Rockefeller received themassive
support of the usually Democratic Italian and Irish neighborhoods in
Greater New York.
Yet, in spite of this clear evidence. American history and politicsare
generally taught as if ethnic politics did not exist. What iseven worse,
history and political science courses in colleges and secondaryschools
often ignore, distort or underplay the history of the immigrationand
story of the adjustment of millions of immigrants which, after all, isone
of the key factors in the entire history of the United States.
One civics textbook in a section entitled "Your Political Interests"
poses the question, "Why do many descendants of early immigrants
support the Republican Party?" It answers: "Let's looka little closer at
some of the questions. One concerned your ancestors. America has
always been a land of immigrants. The people who voluntarilycame


[Page 286]
268TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
during the 1600's, 1700's and 1800's were mainly from countries from
northwestern Europe such as England and Germany. Most of these
early immigrants became successful businessmen, craftsmen, and farm-
ers. Their descendants continued to thrive in America. They disliked
government interference in their lives. Today most back the Republican
Party, which has traditionally sought less government interference in
peoples' lives.
"Africans also came to America in this early period, but not as
immigrants. Rather they were forcibly brought here as slaves. The Dem-
ocratic Party has by and large won the allegiance of Afro-Americans.
"The more recent immigrants to America came from countries in
southern and eastern Europe, such as Italy and Poland, or from coun-
tries south of us, such as Mexico and Cuba. Most have turned to the
Democratic Party, which has welcomed the poor and foreign-born.
"Can you now see why many Catholics are Democratic? It is because
the more recent immigrants came from Catholic countries such as Ire-
land, Italy, Mexico and Cuba."
In a sense it is unfair to quote this simplistic, patronizing and con-
fused account from this particular textbook. Most other textbooks give
the subject of immigration and ethnic groups the same inadequate
treatment. Some say nothing on the subject. The index of the cited civics
textbook, and of almost all such texts, has no entry under the words
Italians, Poles, Jews, and no reference to "ethnicity," "ethnic groups,"
"ethnically balanced slates," or "ethnic voting groups." The textbook
does, however, give a reasonably adequate treatment to the status and
problems of the black minority.
A deservedly popular textbook on government and civics'' does not
have an entry in its index under "Poles," "Italians," or "Jews," "ethnic
groups," or "ethnic blocs," which simply means that the teachers and
the students can and do study the operations of the American political
system without once discussing the making of ethnically balanced state
tickets in most of the big states of the Union, or the influence of the
Polish vote in Chicago, the Jewish vote in New York or the Italian vote
in Newark and Rhode Island. These students will never know, at least as
long as they are in school, that as we have seen in many Congressional
districts in the United States, only members of certain ethnic groups can
and are usually elected to Congress. Even more importantly, they will
learn nothing about the contributions of the major ethnic groups to the
working of our political system.
Textbooks in political science used in colleges and universities are
hardly any better when dealing with ethnic groups. A college student
can easily graduate from a respectable college, with a major in political
science, without ever encountering a serious discussion of ethnic politics


[Page 287]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups269
in Chicago and without a professor suggesting that he study the voting
patterns of Jews in New York or the Italian vote in Rhode Island. The
most popular textbooks used in political science courses generally ignore
the political role played by the white ethnic groups in America. The
reason for this is quite simple. Political scientists and sociologists on the
campuses of eminent universities where most of the research which
eventually finds its way into textbooks is done do not consider ethnicity
to be a respectable subject of study. In addition, few if any political
science departments in top ranking universities have professors who
have done much scholarly work on the white ethnic groups in America.
Politics, Parties, and Pressure Groups by V. 0. Key, Jr., has been for
years a basic text used in political science courses in colleges and
universities throughout the country." The book, since its publication in
1942, has appeared in several revised editions. The reputation of Key's
book is well deserved, but one looks in vain for a reasonably extensive
treatment on the ethnic groups and their influence on American politics.
Key mentions "groups of particular national, origin" in his extensive
general discussion of the operation of lobbies and special pressure
groups. He disposes of the entire question of ethnicity in one paragraph,
in which he says that "the land abounds with Irish, German, Italian,
Scandinavian and Polish societies. Such groups do some lobbying, but
the volatility of their electoral preferences assures a respectful consider-
ation of their sentiments by politicians even without a reminder from the
lobby." Here again is the usual patronizing tone so prevalent in refer-
ence to the ethnic groups and c hnic feelings.
The long and excellent section on "Electoral Participation" in Key's
textbook discusses the voting patterns of various economic groups, city
and suburb dwellers, the question of black voting rights, Ixnothing
to say about the German voting bloc in Milwaukee, of the Catholic Irish
voting bloc in Connecticut, or of the POlish group voting in Chicago.
The index to Key's book includes no entries to any of the major ethnic
groups, with the exception of Jews, who are briefly referred to as trying
to influence United States' foreign policy toward Israel.
Government by the People, by James MacGregor Burns and Jack
Walter Peltason, is also a widely used political science textbook on
university campuses. It was originally published in 1952, and has been
reprinted in many editions ever since. A separate chapter, missing in
many other textbooks, deals with immigration history and the rights of
aliens, and with laws on naturalization.
The section on "Political Behavior" deals with voting patterns and
interest groups and with political parties. It is thorough, cogent and well
written, but ignores the role of ethnic groups in the American political
process. The authors list patterns of voting in America. They find that


[Page 288]
ri
0,1(4
n
r
Ark


[Page 289]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups271
there is "state voting," "sectional voting," "national voting," "split vot-
ing" and pattern of voting overtime." The "ethnic pattern" of voting,
which is so obvious to candidates for the Presidency, togovernors and
mayors, and to chairmen of both national political parties, has been
completely overlooked. In a section entitled, "Why We Vote As We
Do?" the authors list a fruit grower, a housewife,a stenographer. a
young barber, a local surgeon, a factory worker, a housewife, an indus-
trialist, an unemployed person, and a salesgirlall of whom list their
own particular special interest which caused them to vote either Demo-
cratic or Republican. Curiously, the authors did not include in this lista
"Polish-American," a "Jewish-American," or an "Italian-American,"
who also ofteb vote in state and national elections according to their
respective ethnic considerations.
In the chapter on interest groups, Burns and Peltason havea section
entitled "National, Racial and Religious Groups," which, with the "Na-
tionality groups," "are another important factor in American politics."'s
The authors list the influence of the Irish in Boston, of the Germans and
Scandinavians in north-central states, of the French-Canadians in New
England, and of the Spanish in New Mexico. There is no discussion of
the considerable influence on American politics by the other large ethnic
groups, the Poles, the Jews and the Italians. Professors Burns and
Peltason, after this sketchy and inadequate reference to the ethnic
groups, assert that these nationality groups are a passing phenomenon
on the American political scene. These nationality groups, the authors
say, "may gradually lose political leverage as their members become
increasingly absorbed into the mainstreams of American life." This
hope and prediction has been voiced by Anglo-Saxon scholars formany
decades, but the ethnic groups seem to be blithely ignoring them.
The picture is dismal and needs correction, but the task of writing and
teaching about white ethnic groups is a formidable one. Those who press
for courses on white ethnic minorities cannot brush aside the difficulties
and the dangers inherent in the introduction of ethnic studies into the
school curricula.
We have already pointed out the existing anti-black feelingsamong
considerable sections of the white ethnic groups. There is little doubt
that racism played an important role in the massive voting for Hanrahan
by Poles and Italians in Chicago. Similarly, there is little doubt that the
Italians and the Irish turned against the Democratic Party in the New
York 1970 gubernatorial elections, at least in part, because the Demo-
cratsran Arthur Gold,-for Governor and Basil Paterson, a black
man for Lieutenantr. Teaching about white ethnic groups and
their grievances willae very skillful if it is to deal effectively with
these touchy ethnic wi.,'lack relations.


[Page 290]
272TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
Another factor complicating the problem of teaching about white
ethnic minorities is the fact that there is a large measure of accumulated
distrust and antagonism among some of these groups. These feelings of
hostility are the direct result of the old feuds which were (and are) so
prevalent and bitter in Europe. A teacher who wants to teach about the
Serbs, their culture and history had better beware of saying anything
that may be derogatory to the Croats who have been (and are) the bitter
enemies of the Serbs in the Balkans and in the new Yugoslavia. If during
a lesson on Polish history, a statement was to be made that the city of
Wilno was a Polish city, it would result in bitter protests from Lithua-
nian priests and organizations who consider that city an ancient capital
of Lithuania which was taken by force by the Poles. Any suggestion that
there was anti-semitism in pre-war Poland may be loudly protested by
Polish-American organizations. Woe to the teacher who would teach
about Armenian history and culture and not condemn the Turks for
their massacre of the Armenians in the 1920's. The task of teaching
about the Italian-Americans presents a very xfficult problem of how to
deal with the question of organized crime, the Mafia, etc. The flap
surrounding the filming of The Godfather and the protests of Italian-
American organizations indicate the magnitude of the problem. Again,
these difficulties are not insurmountable, but they must be faced and
overcome by study and research.
It is not an easy task to summarize this complicated discussion of the
problems connected with f.le teaching of the experience of white ethnic
groups in America. First, let us reiterate our assumption that the United
States' white population is basically a united nation of descendants of
immigrants. Second, there are important pockets of white ethnic minori-
ties which for a variety of reasons, and albeit in a variety of ways, wish
to preserve their identity. It is also clear that there are ethnic voting
blocs in this country which, because of the delicate balance of power
between the two major political parties, play an important role in Amer-
ican politics.
Finally, it is suggested that the history of the culture and the political
impact of the white ethnics has been ignored in the social studies and
political science curricula and that this omission has to be corrected.
T1'.. teaching of the experience of the white ethnic minorities presents,
1 -,wever, serious problems and pitfalls which will have to be carefully
avoided. What is needed now is an intensive effort which may well be
spearheaded by the National Council for the Social Studies to do schol-
arly research into the entire problem of white ethnic studies. This could
probably best be done by a joint effort of school people and scholars
working in the areas of ethnic history and cultures.


[Page 291]
la la
LIIi 2.2
12
100I
I 0 11I
111E 5 11111 '.4IIIII
MICROCOPY RESOLUTION;JEST CHART
NATIONAL BUREAUDS:19634OF'iadAR


[Page 292]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups273
Suggested Teaching. Strategies
by Elizabeth 0. Pearson*
Main idea
A. When cultures fneet, they combine and adapt traditions and customs.
1. Ask students to list the customs of an ethnic group such as the Swedes,
Germans, Irish, or Czechs which are honored in their native country.
Arrange interviews with people who identify with that ethnic group now
to find out what customs are still followed and how they are carried out.
Students may choose to read a biography or fictional book about an
immigrant from the country being discussed to determine customs.
2. Show the filmstrip on the Irish from the series entitled "Immigration:
The Dream and the Reality" by Warren Schloat Productions. Focus on
how immigrants from white ethnic groups have adapted to American
culture. Adaptation in the slum is the subject of How the Other Half
Lives by Jacob Riis, and Giants in the Earth by Ralvaag tells of the
struggles of an immigrant-farming family. Biographies and novels will
be useful supplements to the filmstrip.
Use these guiding questions to focus on cultural adaptation:
a. What problems did the immigrants encounter upon their arrival in
the U. S.?
b.In what ways did they try to solve their problems?
c. Develop criteria to rate the success of adaptation.
d. Determine their success from the criteria.
3. Ask students what their ethnic backgrounds are. Discuss their degree of
awareness of that background. Ask if it is referred to at home, if any
family customs stem from that ethnic background, and what they feel
toward their ethnic heritage.
Main idea
B. Ethnic groups still remain a powerful force in American politics.
1. Studying the makeup of presidential tickets is a guide to the power of
ethnic groups in American life. Ask students to determine the ethnic
origins, religion and section of the country from which each presidential
and vice presidential candidate originated.
See page 117 for biographical sketch.


[Page 293]
""


[Page 294]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups275
From this data they should determine the effect that ethnic groups
and region of the country have on the makeup of the presidential tick-
ets. A close look at a recent vice presidential choice will be a means of
determining how important a balanced ticket remains today.
2. Some towns are made up of predominantly one ethnic group. In these
towns the leading political offices are held by members of that ethnic
group. Student interest might be aroused if they researched the names
and backgrounds of leading political leaders from their town in the past
twenty years. The mayor, city council members and members of the
board of education would most characteristically reflect the ethnic
makeup of the town.
An indepth'study of one local campaign would indicate whether
candidates directed special attention to certain ethnic groups. If the
town is represented in the city council.by persons from different parts of
the city, a survey of population areas would indicate whether or not
councilmen reflect the ethnic makeup of the areas they represent.
3. While it may be deterinined that ethnic groups tend to vote one way in
an election, do they consistently vote one party? Or does a candidate
with certain characteristics attract voters of a particular ethnic group
regardless of party? A study of past elections may give some clue. For
example, what happened when Barry Goldwater was the Republican-
Presidential candidate in 1964?Did ethniC groups who voted for Nixon
in 1960 continue to vote Republican in 1964? Did John Kennedy draw
more ethnic voters to his side in 1960 than did Lyndon Johnson in
1964?
A survey of voting statistics for these elections could provide answers
and also give students some experience in understanding election sta
tistics.
Main Idea
C. White ethnic groups have assimilated into American society successfully,
but at the same time maintain identities of separateness.
1. What reminders of white ethnicity still exist in the-U.S. of the 1970's?
Obvious items come to mind such as the Italian protest over the film
The Godfather, and novels about Jewish people such as Herzog by Saul
Bellow. The nationally celebrated St. Patrick's Day belongs to the Irish,
and the Swedes have their Swedish Clubs. Ask students to name other
aspects of white ethnicity with which they are familiar. Then discuss
how essential these characteristics are in maintaining ethnic diversity.
2. Some interesting materials are available which deal with diversity and
unity among white ethnic groups. Makers of America is a tenvolume
I
v


[Page 295]
1
276TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
documentary history of American ethnic groups put out by Encyclope-
dia Britannica Corporation and edited by Wayne Moquin. Students may
choose to follow a particular ethnic group through American history
using documents. Student interest could be. aroused initially with the
film A Nation of Immigrants from Films 'Incorporated.A concluding
question for all students to ponder is: Are white ethnic groups distinc-
tive in name only?
3. The public's perception of ethnicity could be obtained through a student
survey. Ask a small group of interested students to write a question-
naire which will focus upon the public's perception of the existence of
white ethnic groups. A community person who is familiar with the
technique of writing questionnaires would be a useful consultant for
students.. ,._.
Students could either poll persons in their neighborhood or concen-
trate on family friends. More complete results will be obtained if stu-
dents ask. the questions and record answers rather than asking the
interviewee to respond on his own. An interesting comparison could be
made between student poll results'and the findings expressed in the
previous article.


[Page 296]
Teaching the Experience of White Ethnic Groups277
FOOTNOTES
Garry Wills, "Great White Ethnic Hoax in Politics," Chicago Sun- Times, January 25,
1972, p.24..
a New York Times, March 18, 1972, p. 31.  1972 by The New York Times Company.
Reprinted by permission.
' New York Times, March 19, 1972, p. 45.  1972 by The New York Times Company.
Reprinted by permission.
'Ibid..
' Overcoming Middle-Class Rage, Murray Friedman, editor. New York: Westminster
Press, 1972, p. 31.
';New Yorker, Nov. 20, 1971, p. 225.
' Andrew Greeley, Why Can't They Be Like Us? New York: Institute of Human
Relation's Press, 1969.
' New York Tides, March 19, 1972.  1972 by The New York Times Company. Re-
printed by permission.. .
' New York Times, April 18, 1971, p. 17. (italics mine)  1971 by The New York Times
Company. Reprinted by permission.
l New Yorker, op. cit., p. 225.
" Grant- T. Ball and Lee J. Rosch, Civics Study Lessons. Chicago: Follett Educational
Corporation, 1969, pp. 286-287.
" Robert P. Ludlum, Franklin Patterson, Eber N. Jeffery, and Allan Schick, American
GovernmentNational, State and Local. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1969.-
" V. G. Key, Jr., Politics, Parties, and Pressure Groups. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell
Company, 1964.
"James MacGregor Burns and Jack Walter Peltason, Government By the People.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jerky: Prentice-Hall, 1965, pp. 244-246.
9 Ibid., p. 297..
1' Congressional Record, Vol. 117, No. 3, 92nd Congress, p. 1012.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Beyond the Melting Pot (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1970). A splendid pioneering survey of the white ethnic
communities in New York.
Edward C. Banfield and James Q. Wilson, City Politics (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press, 1968). A study of city politics focusing on machine politics,
Peter Binzen, Whitetown, U.S.A. (New York: Random House, 1970). A survey of the
problems and grievances of the white blue-collar residents in Philadelphia's Kensington
section.
Andrew Greeley, Why Can't They Be Like Us? (New York: American Jewish Committee,
Institute of Human Relations Press, 1969). An exploration of the white ethnics, their
identity and confrontation with the blacks. Greeley is eloquent when he talks about the
need of the white ethnics to find comfort in their group.
Michael Novak, The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics (New York: Macmillan, 1972). A
rather one-sided but interestintattack on the WASP mentality and ethic.
Murray Friedman, editor, Overcoming Middle-Class Rage (Philadelphia, Pa.: Westminster
Press, 1972). A helpful compilation of essays on white ethnics and the "new pluralism."


[Page 297]
Janice Law Trecker
JANICE LAW TRECKER is a free-lance writer who lives in West
Hartford, Connecticut. She received her B.A. degree from Syracuse
University (Phi Beta Kappa), a teaching certificate from the University
of Hartford, and an M.A. in English Literatnre ,from the University of
Connecticut. Ms. Trecker was formerly a junior high school teacher.
Since 1967, she has been a free-lance writer and weekly film reviewer for
the West Hartford News. Her articles have appeared in Social Educa-
tion, Saturday Review, and The American Scholar. Ms. Trecker is
currently working on a series on Connecticut history to be published by
Pequot Press, and has completed a series of four filmstrips on women in
American history. In 1971, she presented a paper on the militant suffra-
gettes of the Women's Party at the Association for the Study of Con-
necticut History.
278


[Page 298]
JANICE LAW TRECKER
Teaching
the Role of Women
in American History
12
Social, studies occupy a unique position in the American school curricu
lum. Social studies teachers are not only responsible for one major
discipline, history, but they are also charged with developing students'
capacities for citizenship, and for guiding them through governmental
structures, current affaiis and contemporary problems. The dual role of
the social studies could make it an important force for analyzing and
changing the status of female students and for affecting the role of
women in the larger society.
There are three areas in the social studies which are in need of
intelligent revision with respect to women:, history, current problems and
citizenship. Each of these areas is of vital interest to women, and it can
be shown that the omission of women and of women's problems from
these areas does great harm, not only to the self-image of female stu-
dents, but to the competence and intellectual honesty of the educational
enterprise.
Until very recently, it was fashionable to respond to questions about
women in history by saying, "but women haven't done anything." Cur-
rent research into women's history, however, shows that women have
taken an active part in American history at all periods and that only
cultural stereotypes and resistance to change have kept them from their
rightful place in the nation's. story. Unfortunately, few of our popular
history textbooks have shown any awareness of new information about
the contributions and position of women. Most books stick to the
traditional model. Women receive a few paragraphs of extravagant


[Page 299]
280 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
praise as essential to America, their high position in our culture is
stressed, and a few are even mentioned. For the other 99 percent of the
book, women are ignored. That this procedure is inaccurate, biased and
out-of-date is only now gaining recognition.
What current texts seem to be telling students is that women are
secondary beings, incompetent, unimportant, passive and contented
with the status quo. The authors largely ignore major social develop-
inents initiated by women or those concerned with women's status: The
whole story of the rights movement is lucky if it receives a page; the
'bitter struggle for birth control is ignored. Women's work in colonial
and frontier America is displaced by eulogies to the frontiersman and
the repeating revolver. -Women thinkers are squeezed out by inane
commentaries on lengths of women's skirts. America's female artists
actresses, writers, dancers, painters, sculptors, singerstake second
place to descriptions of the Gibson Girl or the Flapper.
Can anything be done about women's historyaside from complain-
ing loudly to the major textbook-firms? Fortunately, the answer is yes.
More and more material is being produced, especially designed for
secondary students. Even now, the resourceful teacher should have few
problems in finding a wealth of information and many -points in the
curriculum where consideration of women is_ not only possible, but
necessary.
It is difficult to see, for example, how one can discuss the history of
industrialization and the labor movement without major consideration
of the position of women. Who operated the nation's first textile mills?
Was not the fact that these eighteenth-century "manufactories"gave
employment to women and children,- who "would else be idle," the
justification for industrial as opposed to agricultural development? Was
it not the factories that gave employment to the immigrant women and
offered native born farmers' daughters their first chance to .be indepen-
dent and to contribute cash to the family coffers? Were not women and
children the most exploited workers, whether in sweatshop tenements or
in barn-like factories? Was not their very exploitation a threat to the
wage stability and organization of male workers? Did not women strike
and organize and support male unions even under extreme hardship?
And did not women, women workers and women organizers fight to end
child labor abuses and the frightful conditions of the nation's factories?
How then can women in labor be dismissed with a few lines when a
wealth of documentary and secondary material is available in paper-
backs, old newspapers and in any good library?
There are other topics equally worthy of investigation. Humanitarian
reform is one of the few topics given coverage, but even here there is
much more to be discussed. Elizabeth Massey's Bonnet Brigades, a


[Page 300]
L
Ir
-
, N I II I
-',41111f-'-
1".
G."01111; e
..
Jill 111111,
r
..'1'$$1
.7"p,J
I
; r
:,t,`,$',iilikY40,;%1444g.ragitga.W04;i4,44.61
4,tAt4UlgkA0444.1604=0,Js44,hiafaity
(lir
}4 I
ve'-
kr)
44
sZ.V\
44,iW
;4
;11111}W
41.


[Page 301]
282 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
volume in the Harvard Civil War Series, discusses the many contribu-
tions of women to the war efforts. She notes that women not only raised
gigantic sums of money for uniforms, provisions and the war effort but
they also took on nursing and what are now USO services. They devel-
oped diet kitchens for the sick, and after the war, aided alcoholic
soldiers, worked with soldiers' families, searched for graves and assisted
with pension claims. In fact, women developed and perforMed the
services now provided by massive organizations like the Veterans Ad-
ministration..
Women also worked in the urban ghettos pioneering in the establish-
ment of visiting nurse services and the study of industrial medicine.
They developed social work and provided a variety of services for the
poor, the consumer and for children. Sometimes these services are men-
tioned, rarely are the reasons why women were attracted into these new
fields discussed. The women of the late nineteenth century literally had
to invent new professions to be of service, because their society had no
place for them outside of home and children.
One of the greatest battles of the early twentieth century is inexplica-
bly omittedthe crusade for birth control. How many students know
that men and women were jailed for advocating birth control? That
books were seized, that clinics were raided by the police? That desperate
birth control workers went on hunger strikes to plead their case? That
slum workers were confronted by women lined up for quack abortions
and helplessly watched patientdie from bungled operations, disease
and childbearing? How many know about bitter religious opposition to
birth controlor to other aspects of the women's rights movement? Yet,
the material is on many library shelves.
The fight for birth control touches a number of themes unjustly
neglected in American history. At least at the secondary level, textbook
authors appear anxious to avoid discussion of sex prejudice, censorship,
the connection between religious ideas and political pressures, and ideas
of "decency" and sexuality. Is it tact, prudery or timidity which prevents
discussion of clerical and religious conservatism, from the denunciations
of early female suffragists and abolitionists by Protestant clergy to
vitrolic criticisms of birth control by the Catholic hierarchy? In either
case, a topic of importance, the relationships between church and state,
is neglected along with the whole trot bling question of American atti-
tudes toward sexuality, especially toward femalesexuality.
There are many other areas where women's history is neglected, as
well; one is the early position of women. For example, nothing was more
essential to the early colonies than a rapid increase in population. Yet,
little is ever made of this fact. What about the high infant and maternal
mortality rates in the early colonies? How large were families? What


[Page 302]
/
Teaching the Role of Women in American History283
sorts of social control were exercised over women to insure early mar-
riage and large families? Further, what did women do, inside and out-
side the home? Usually, it is assumed that women stayed home and did
their house work, but this is inaccurate. Books like Julia Cherry Spruill's
Women and Work in the Southern Colonies show that women, espe-
cially single women and widows, had considerable-freedom. They were
planters, traders and entrepreneurs in their own right; they wielded
economic and, sometimes, even political power. Wothen in the early
period were essential to the basic economic unitthe familynot only
as mothers and wives, but as producers of goods and as workers. If this
is true, it is not adequate to treat only the lives of the men of the frontier,
the colonies or the American Revolution.
Women's education is another largely untouched subject. How many
students know that women literally bought their way into schools? How
many know-the sacrifices women and girls made to open _education to
women, the weight of theory and 'social custom they breached or the
Problems they still face? Confronting women like Emma Willard, Catha-
rine Beecher and the other early educators can we say, complacently,
that Victorian women were passive and genteel?
No doubt the greatest obstacle to the serious treatment of women in
American history is the pervasive notion that women are weak, silly
creatures, who have been indulged by their society. The 'facts, however,
are the best corrective to that notion. No one who has read the diaries,
letters and records of the women of the Western migrations can believe
the textbook picture of the noble, but sadly idealized and undefined,
pioneer woman. No one who has read the story of the suffrage move-
ment believes the assurances that "women were given the vote." No one
who has read narratives of the Triangle Fire of 1911 will be satisfied
with a sentence about women workers. No one who. knows about Mar-
garet Sanger, Isadora Duncan, and Alice -Paul will believe that the
Flapper was the most important female phenomenon of their time.
There are many topics which need re-examination in American history..
Students need to know about great women and events and about their
society's attitude toward women. They need information about how a
politically powerless group operated, what the lives of average women
were like and how. they related to males. Even the briefest acquaintance
with the material available raises serious questions about the present
manner of presenting our nation's story and about the casual loss of a
heritage precious to both female, and male, students.
If the treatment of women in history continues to be inadequate, the
same may be said for examinations of contemporary problems. History
books which include information up through the terms of Presidents
Kennedy and Johnson rarely suggest that discrimination against women
0


[Page 303]
284TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
was a continuing problem even after women won thevote. Frequently,
discussions of the landmark Title 7 provisionof.the 1964 Civil Rights
Act omit the fact that the new legislationwas amended to cover women
or that women, in fact, stilliteeded legal help.
There are many other topics in current affairs whichshould include
referenels to women and discussions of women'sstatus. Problems such
as poverty, race relations and population control are complicatedby the
inferior legal, economic, and social status ofwomen. Other problems,
often completely neglected,are directly concerned with women:sex
discrimination, birth control, abortion and thepersistence of cultural
stereotypes of female inferiority. Studentscannot be expected to deal
intelligently with any of these issues withotitinformation about women
and their place in society. Asan example, it might be worthwhile to look
at one major topic discussed in problems of democracyand current
affairs courses: Poverty. Although poverty isone of our most pressing
national problems, the general public remainssurprisingly ignorant ofthe factors in poverty thatare linked to sex. Statistics published in A
Matter of Simple Justice (1970), thereport of President Nixon's Task
Force on the Status of Women, however, revealvery clearly the factor of
sex discrimination in deciding who shall be poor.
The poor, by and large,are women and their children. Two-thirds of
the adult poor are female, and althoughminority group familiesare
much more likely to bepoor than their white counterparts, the majority
of the poor are still white. Womenare poor, among other reasons,
because they earn less money. Governmentcensus figures show that for
full-time, year-round workers,average earnings for white males are
$7,396; for black males, $4,777; for white females,$4,279; and for black
females, $3,194. The impact of both sexual and racialdiscrimination isclearly shown.
There are other factors which also insure that thepoor will be promi-
nently a female population: discrimination in education;discrimination
in the labor market and by labor organizations;the lack of day' care
facilities; and difficulty of access to family planning,contraceptives and
abortion. Despite the overwhelming numbers ofpoor women,. despite
the fact that females are the poorest of thepoor, federal monies for job
training, for example, favor males, and the publiccontinues to deny that
sex prejudice could have any bearing on such problemsas welfare,
poverty and the urban crisis. Surely, the social studies havea responsi-
bility to see that evidence of thetrue position of American women is
made available to students.
If women are an invisible majority in discussionsof poverty, they are
an invisible minority in examinations of crime and delinquency.True,
women represent only a tiny fraction of the criminal population.They


[Page 304]
"Surely, the social studies have a responsibility to see that evidence of the true
position of American women is made available to students."
are worthy of notice, however, because the criminal or delinquent
woman represents a special and neglected problem. For one thing, most
female criminals are apprehended for the so-called "victimless crimes,"-*
chiefly prostitution and addiction. Compared to male criminals they are
a relatively harmless lot, yet their prison conditions are as harsh and
often harsher than those of their male counterparts. Female delinquents
offer an even sharper example of the way social attitudes influence what
is considered criminal behavior. Many of the delinquent females con-
fined in various reformatories are innocent of any crime; they are
categorized as "persons in need of supervision." In some states young
females may be arrested simply because they it iy be in "manifest
danger of falling into vice," vice usually being interpreted as sexual
activity. While protecting minors from adult ex, loitation is certainly
important, treatment of female delinquents raises many questions about
criminal justice, the efficacy of reform schools and the role that sex
attitudes play in labeling females either delinquent or criminal.
Other problems would also bene:it from additional information about
285


[Page 305]
286i.NG ETHNIC STUDIES
women. If would be difficult to discusscensorship, for example, without
reference to attitudes toward women and toward female sexuality. Atti-
tudes toward women, ideals of female chastity and fears of miscegena-
tion have long complicated American race relations. Yet, the part that
attitudes toward women have played in race prejudice is rarely men-
tioned. Discussions of contemporary labor problems tend to neglect
women, just as do historical studies of thelabor movement. Today,
women make up forty percent of the American workforce, but they are
utilized primarily as a pool of expendable labor in the lowest paid
positions. In an economy where jobs are scarce, what information do
future citizens need about working women? How will they beequipped
to decide such difficult questions as who should get theavailable jobs?
How will our national policies have to be changed if women continue to
go to work in increasing numbers? These arequestions that rightfully
belong in any discussion of current affairs, women's status or labor
relations.
The matter of women in the work force raises another major area of
concern; namely, how may the nation best utilizeits human resources?
Various forms of discrimination have constantly deprived us of the
benefits of large amounts of brainpower and talent. Our major untapped
source of intellectual power today is female. Something ofthe loss can
be appreciated when we learn that of the top ten percent of&II high
school students, twice as many girls as boys have no college plans. It has
long been noted that female students avoid mathematics and science.
Yet, recent research by the World Health Organization indicates that the
differences between male and female talents in mathematics and science
are so small as to beinsignificant. Only forty percent of our under-
graduates in college are female and the percentages drop off rapidly at
higher academic levels. In the skilled trades, mechanical and technical
work, the loss is almost complete; females with talent in these areas are
simply lost to the nation. Considering the desperate need for skilled
personnel, the waste of female talent is a major nationalproblem.
Perhaps it should be an area for study and analysis in the social studies.
There are many other areas, from legal theory to examination of
American ideals, which necessarily involve women.i One of the newest
problems definitely does: ecology and populationcont.:ol. At first glance
the special significance of the position of women does not seem crucial
to ecology, but it most definitely is. Women are the great consumersin
our culture and while the nation spendsmillions toi clean rivers, air and
landscape, American corporations spend billions to persuade Americans
to buy the detergents that pollute, the conveniencepackaging that litters
and the motors that gulp available power. Much of this advertising is
directed basically at women and is designed to enforce old cultural


[Page 306]
I
1
"Our major untapped source of intellectual power today isfemale."
stereotypes: woman's place is in the home;domestic prowess is the only
area of competition for women;female ,attractiveness is a woman's
highest possession. The relationships between cultural imagesof women,
the media and ecological movements is a most provocativeareaand
one which rightly belongs to, thesocial studies.
The problem of population limitation is even more directlyrelated to
women and to their place in our culturethan is ecology and consumer-
ism. For centuries, the dearest interests of women have beensacrificed
by society for its own perpetuation. Unless women had lotsof children
the society died. Today, the reverse is more nearly true.Unless women
have and want fewer children, we may all be starvedoff the earth. But
are our culture, our education and ourideals changing to fit changed
conditions? Unless our society is willing to allow women moresatisfac-
tions outside the home, and unless a woman's value andself-image can
be recognized apart from her roles as wife, mother andsexual partner,
we will face a social problem oftitanic proportions with the majority of
the population schooled for roles they cannot possibly beallowed to
287


[Page 307]
-288TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
fulfill. When we realize that theaverage American woman has her last
child before the age of thirty, we cansee that there is already a limit to
the extent that motherhood can be "woman's profession."Furthermore,
since the average woman works for twenty-fiveyears outside the home,
she will be condemned to menialor low paying jobs unless she is
encouraged to pursue career training and to aspireto a definite vocation.
Our rapidly changing social conditions makesuch topics as social
conditioning and sex role socialization importantfor the social studies,
as well as for psychology. There is no more basic factor inany culture
than its ideals of what constitutes masculinity andfemininity. It does
not lake much analysis to see the far-reaching socialconsequences of
radical changes in the role and relative position ofthe sexes. It appears
that these changes are underway, if notas a result of feminist move-
ments, as a result of the drastic need to control populationgrowth.
It becomes important, therefore, for studentsto understand the forces
that shape concepts of femininity and masculinitynot simply to under-
Stand themselves, but to understand the social andpolitical structures of
their society and to gauge the impact ofmovements designed to effect
change in sex roles. There are a number ofways in which such material
could be incorporated-4hrough analysis ofcurrent ideas of masculinity
and femininity, through theories of socializationand sex tole stereo-
types, and through cross-cultural and historical comparisons. Consider-
ing the importance of how societies lookat sex role and at the differ-
ences between the sexes, it is rather surprising thatcourses presenting
different attitudes-and examining the consequencesof different crefini-
tions of masculine and feminineare not, popular and prevalent.
Examination of the persistence of culturalstereotypes leads us to
problems of specific concern towomen or to fifty-one percent of the
national population. Of these concerns,one of the most complex and
emotionally charged is abortion. While primarilya women's issue, abor-
tion repeal or reform also raises basic questionsabout ethical beliefs,
medical practice, and religiouspressures in government. Given the pace
of court tests on the legality of anti-abortionstatutes, this matter of
conscience and of human rights willno doubt be one of the matters that
today's students must decide. Itseems wrong for prudery or sensitivity
to public pressures to keep pupils from anawareness of all facts and
issues surrounding abortion and women's controlover their own bodies.
Similar timidity is also evident in unwillingnessto handle the prob-
lems and questions raised bysex education. While the social studies
department is not charged with the teaching ofprograms in sex educa-
tion, the issue of whether or not minors havea right to knowledge about
the functioning of their own bodiesvery definitely does belong in cur-
rent affairs or problems in democracy typecourses. In this issue, as in


[Page 308]
,
Teaching the Role of Women in American History289
historical treatments of birth control and the debates about abortion, we
can see the same complex of issues: female sexuality andsocietal con-
trol, political and, especially, religious pressures on social structures and
the effect of ethical standards on freedom of inquiry. In addition, sex
education raises important questions about the validity of universal
mandatory education, about parents' right to control their children's
education and children's right to knowledge which may well be essential
for their successful functioning in their society. It is perhaps unnecessary
to notice that the resolution of this issue, as is the case with birth control
and abortion, has potentially far greater. effect on female than on male
students.
Nor are issues related to biological sex the only matters that affect
great numbers of American women. While civil rights and discrimina-
tion are chiefly presented as racial and ethnic matters, the fact remains
that the largest group of persons facing discrimination today are the
majority sex. There are indications that women are at last realizing the
obstacles they face in law, education, employment and public policy.
Students need facts about this pervasive discrimination, and there is
certainly no dearth of information. Books like Leo Kanowitz's Women
and the Law and testimony before the U. S. Senate and House commit-
tees on the proposed 'Equal Rights Amendment provide ample docu-
mentation of remaining legal abuses, as do the reports of the Presidents'
Task Forces on women's status. The latter are eminently concise and
readable documents, entirely suitable for classroom use.
Discrimination in education is also receiving ample documentation,
and it would be hard to argue that secondary students do not have a
right and need to know the extent of discrimination in education, the
legal remedies now available to them and the gaps which still exist in
civil rights legislation in this area. Yet, how many girls are aware that
they can be, and most likely will be, required to have higher college
board test scores than boys? How many have wondered why their state
universities may have a female-enrollment of only forty percent when
the female population is larger than the male? How many girls are
currently deprived of access to vocational and technical training either
de jure, as was the case in some NYC schools until 1972, or de facto, as
is often the case where biased recruiting policies or "unsuitable facili-
ties" discourage female applicants? How many girls are denied equal
opportunity in extracurricular activities for leadership and entertain-
ment, especially in athletics? How many social studies courses take up
these topics? It would be easy to get suitable course materials.
Discrimination in education is compounded for females by discrimi-
nation in employment. How many students who face prejudice because
of race, ethnic origin or sex are given a clear understanding of what to


[Page 309]
290 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
do against discrimination? How many students know the legal and
historical background of such prejudice? How many understand the
agencies and mechanisms that are designed to help aggrieved parties?
While the civil rights movement has helped to focus on remedies for
discrimination because of color and race, there still exists a widespread
feeling that sex discrimination is not serious or that sex discrimination is
somehow "all right" The reasons for this attitude are worth analysis, as
are the facts about employment discrimination and the ways individuals
can fight to get jobs for which they are qualified.
It should be clear that while all students need information about
discriminatory practices, the importance for females and minorities is
practical as well as theoretical. Female students need to 'be able to fight
discrimination. As the department charged with training students in the
exercise of their citizenship, the social studies clearly seem to have
special responsibilities to female students and other groups facing dis-
crimination.
There is no way, after all, that individuals who are denied equal access
to power structures, to government, to employment and to education
can participate on an equal basis in society. Individuals who receive
unequal legal treatment or whose interests are not giv:n serious consid-
eration in decisions of national policy cannot exercise their citizenship to
its fullest. Further, the current practice of more or less letting girls
discover prejudice for themselves, and finding out how to deal with it on
their own, amounts to little more than the abnegation of responsibility
for the majority of the school population.
What exactly should the schools, and the social studies, be providing
female students in the way of a "survival kit"? First, a clear awareness
that discrimination exists in education, law, business, industry and gov-
ernment. Reports such as the President's Task Force on the Status of
Women and the recent HEW study on the position of women provide
ample information for alerting young women to potential problems,
before they are allowed to become discouraged or to think that failures
and obstacles are-simply their individual problem or incapacity.
Second, young women need to know about avenues of redress, as well
as where present legal or legislative structures are inadequate. It would
seem that one of the chief topics in responsible citizenship courses would
be some indication of changes and new laws needed to allow all citizens
equal opportunity and equal influence in government and in society.
Third, young women need to be encouraged to develop a positive self-
image, through awareness of women of achievement, and of women's
history, through role models to follow and through awareness of their
own skills and talents. The force and prevalence of stereotypes of female
inferiority make efforts to break through such conditioning of prime


[Page 310]
Teaching the Role of Women in American History291
importance. It is no secret that large amounts of female talent are
wasted through low aspirations and feelings of inferiority, and it is up to
educators to see that the schools no longer contribute to that process.
Finally, young men and women need to be aware of the process and
the power of social conditioning. They need to be aware of the forces
that shape their lives if they are to make intelligent decisions about their
futures.
If teachers and schools decide that such material is.properly a part of
the curriculum, how is it to be incorporated? Should information about
women, discrimination and male-female relations be completely inte-
grated into the overall curriculum or should separate women's studies
courses on these topics be established? Probably the ideal situation
would-be for information about women to be properly represented in all
areas of the curriculum. If the aspects of sex 'discrimination present in
poverty were included in discussions of economics and social welfare, if
women's history was incorporated in history. lexts, if other problems and
questions concerning women and their problems were not universally
omitted or slighted, there would be no need for special courses or units -
of study.
Unfortunately, such a utopian situation will probably be a long time
coming. The teacher who is serious about improving female,education is,
--------therefore, faced with two possibilitiesinclude such materials as can be
incorporated into the regular program or set up a separate women's
studies course which might be women's history, women in literature or a
general program on women and ideas about femininity and feminism.
Each alternate has certain advantages. Clearly, there is more than
enough material to create women's studies courses. With over 400
courses in women's studies now offered on the college leirel there are
many models to follow and ample bibliographic material, as well as a
number of new teaching techniques to be explored. In addition to
providing a more thotough treatment of the problems, women's studies
courses may well provide the added bonus of increasing the awareness
and the pride of secondary school women and, thus, be a valuable
educational force in their own right.
On the other hand, incorporating material about women in standard
courses may be a more feasible approach, especially when dealing with
more conservative systems and administrators or with apathetic student
groups. Such a procedure also has the potential of reaching more stu-
dents and especially the students who might not be enthusiastic about
taking a course devoted solely to women. Realistically, decisions about
how best to include material about women may depend on such non-
educational factors as scheduling, staff and administration attitudes, as
well as student demands. Fortunately, both approaches may produce


[Page 311]
292TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
worthwhile results, and they are definitely not mutually exclusive. The
presence of even several good women's studies courses should never be
used as an acceptable excuse to omit women in other parts of the
curriculum..
An informative and responsive curriculum is a major step toward
improving women's education but it needs a sympathetic teaching staff
to make it work. It is foolish to pretend that teachers, even the most
sensitive, capable and concerned, have escaped the prejudices whichour
society holds about women. The stereotypes that limit female aspirations
and opportunities also condition the ways in which teachers regard
material about women and their responsibilities toward women and
their education.
Teachers who are serious about revamping educational systems and
content to insure imprOved schooling for women must also examine
their own attitudes and assumptions. They must become alert to stereo-
types and bias, not just in texts and materials, but also in the operation
of their classrooms and in their relations with students. Awareness of
bias, stereotyped assumptions and unfairness is always a painful revela-
tion, but it is the first step toward improving the education of women
and toward making our educational systems responsive to all the people.
No one has ever pretended that providing equal opportunity in educa-
tion was going to be easy. If that goal has seemed increasingly difficult
and complex, it is perhaps because we have increasingly becomeaware
of assumptions and injustices that earlier generations took for granted.
Awareness of the barriers to equal opportunity is the necessary prelimi-
nary to attainment of equal education. The design of educational sys-
tems and procedures that provide high quality education for all Ameri-
cans and which strengthen the aspirations of each child is, without
doubt, a noble endeavor. It is an endeavor in which social studies
teachers have the opportunity to make a unique and lasting contribu-
tion.
1


[Page 312]
Teaching the Role of Women in American History293
Suggested Teaching Strategies
by Elizabeth 0. Pearson*
Main Idea
A. The changing image and role of women in American society has been
revealed through the communications media of the times.
1. Television commericals are a powerful means of creating an image. Ask
students to watch television for two hours during a weekday morning or
afternoon. They should make a record of each commercial they see
indicating the item advertised, the persons in the commercial (child,
mother, father, single woman, etc.), and a characterization of women in
each commercial; (Woman as housewife, career woman, woman inter-
ested in beauty aids.) Ask students to compare their data and make a
general statement about.the treatment of women in commercials.
2. The same data can be collected from magazine advertisements. Divide
the class into groups according to the content of the magazines. For
example, one group could focus on women's magazines, another on
men's magazines such as Esquire and Playboy, and another on news
magazines such as Newsweek, Time and Ebony. An example of a data
retrieval chart to organize the data follows.
WOMEN'S MAGAZINES
Item Advertised
Persons in
Advertisement
Characterization
of Women
McCall's
Seventeen
Woman's Day
Cosmopolitan
Ask students to develop generalizations about the treatment of women
in advertisements in women's and men's magazines, and news maga
zines. Then have them compare treatments to see if they can generalize
about the relationship between the image of women and all advertise-
ments.
See page 117 for biographical sketch.


[Page 313]
294TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
3. To enlarge the view for younger students of the broadening opportuni
ties for women in contemporary society along with achievements of
women in America's past, ask students to name well-known women. List
them on the board. Then ask students to group the names according to
their own designations. They may develop categories such as women
pioneers, scientists, women from the past and present, women who
came upon their achievement after great hardships. Students may then
be interested in reading about a woman with whom they are not famil
ear. Perusing an anthology may be an easy-way for students to find a
woman about whom they might be interested in reading at greater
length. Heroines of the Early West, a Landmark book by Nancy Wilson
Ross, They Showed the Way: Forty American Negro Leaders by Char le.
mae Hill Rollins, and Famous American Pioneering Women by Edna
Yost are some useful introductory anthologies.
After students have done further reading, bring the class together
and again have students list the women about whom they have read.
Ask them to categorize the names according to when they lived. Fifty.
year time periods would be sufficient. Then discuss whether or not
opportunities for women have expanded since the early days of the
United States.
Main Idea
B. The number of women working outside the home has tended to depend on
the amount of time the woman has had to spend at home as wife and
mother.,
1. To focus on the changing role of a woman's work, ask students to find
statistics on the number of married women, single women and mothers
over the last 150 years. Statistics for every thirty years would provide
sufficient intervals. They should also find the number of women who
were working outside the home during that period. Ask them to look at
the changes in statistics, taking into consideration the total population
of women. They then can try to explain the changes in the context of the
historical periods represented.
2. Present to students a statement by an advocate of women's rights, an
unemployed female head of household and an unemployed male head
of household recommending their priorities in hiring people for jobs.
Ask students to state the problem which is posed in the statements
they have read. Divide the class into three groups:
a. Representing the advocate of women's rights.
b. Representing the unemployed female head of household.
c. Representing the unemployed male head of household.


[Page 314]
Teaching the Role of Women in American History295
Then ask these questions:
a. What does each person whose statement is represented think is most
important about assigning job priorities?
b. How do their values differ?
c. What are some other values which each person could have chosen?
d. What would have been the consequences of each of their choices?
e. What choice would you have made if you were:
(1) an advocate of women's-rights?
(2) an unemployed female head of household?
(3) an unemployed male head of household?
1. How would you feel about your choice?
Teachers might wish to extend this study in values by opening up to
more thorough study the subject of employment policies of private
business and government. A survey of the unemployment rate indicat-
ing how many women and men are Unemployed along with the largest
groups of 'workers who are jobless could be included. The whole ques
tion of how jobs should be provided and on what priorities their assign.
ment should be based could be a major thrust in the study of job
opportunities.
.
3. Inventions which have taken over some of the work in the home have
made it easier for women to work outside the home."Have students list
all the inventions that have taken over duties which had to be done at
home. Have them research the dates of these inventions. Ask them:
a. What is the effect of each on a housewife's work?
b. Is there a relationship between the number and quality of home
conveniences and the percentage of women who work outside the
home during different historical periods?
Main Idea
C. In American history, women have been subject to many kinds of discrimi
nation.
1. To focus on job discrimination, ask a small group of students to gather
statistics on the number of women employed as secretaries, public
school teachers and administrators, college and university teachers,
factory workers, lawyers and doctors in your state in 1925 and 1970.
Have them compare with the number of men in each of these fields.
Then ask:
a. Which professions have a high concentration of women?
b. What changes have occurred over a forty-five-year period in the
employment of women?
c. How do you explain the change or lack of change in employment of
women?


[Page 315]
296 TEACHING ETHNIC STUDIES
2. Ask students to compare Want Ads in newspapers of the 1920's or
1930's with Want Ads in current newspapers. They should make a chart
for each of the two newspapers compared, indicating what jobs were
advertised for women only, for men only, and for both sexes. Have them
explain any differences they find in terms of the historical setting of the
earlier year compared to contemporary America. Ask another group to
find out what state and federal laws say about discrimination in adver
tising for jobs and use this information to help explain the data.
3. Ask a student to read a history of the woman's suffrage movement such
as Woman Suffrage and Politics by Carrie Chapman Catt and Nettie
Rogers Shuler. Both ofthese women were very prominent in passing
the amendment giving women the vote. The student can then give a
report on the kinds of discrinination Can and Shuler report that people
in the suffrage movement encountered. An interesting comparison
might be made if another student read a history of the woman suffrage
movement written twenty or more years after the woman's vote was
accomplished. One such book might be Century of Struggle by Eleanor
Flexner.
After a report to the class on the second book, a class discussion
could be held focusing on the following questions:
a. What portrayal of the opposition to woman suffrage did each book
give?
b. What expectations of the results of woman suffrage did each book
focus upon?
c. What events did the authors of both books view as the most impor
tant in achieving the passage of the suffrage amendment?
d.If there were differences, why?
e. What differences in the content of each book and the interpretation
of that content resulted from the backgrounds of the authors?


[Page 316]
Teaching the Role of Women in American History297
-BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bird, Caroline. Born Female (New York: Pocket Books, 1969). Concise and readable.
Born Female is particularly good on women in the business world.
Flexner, Eleanor. A Century of Struggle (New York: Atheneum, 1%8). A well-written.
scholarly account of the rights movement with much valuable information on women's
education, women in industry and the early status of women.
Freidan, Betty. The Feminine Mystique (New York: Dell, 1963). Still provocative. The
Feminine Mystique has historical, as well as intellectual, interest as a force behind the
current women's movement.
Kanowitz, Leo. Women and the Law (Albuquerque, N.M.: University of New Mexico.
1969). This scholarly study covers almost every phase of the legal status of women.
K.N.O.W. Press..A reprint house which provides articles, manifestoes and research studies
pertinent to the new feminism. K.N.O.W. (P.O.-Box 10197, Pittsburgh. Pa. 15232) is an
excellent source of classroom material, reasonably priced.
Kraditor, Aileen, ed. Up from the Pedestal (Chicago: Quadrangle, 1970). A fine collection
of source documents, feminist and anti-feminist, from the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries' women's rights struggle.
Lerna, Gerda. The Woman in American History (Menlo Park, Calif.: Addison-Wesley,
1971). Disigned for secondary school students, The Woman in American History gives
brief accounts of almost every topic in American women's history.
Massey, Mary Elizabeth. Bonnet Brigades (New York: Knopf, 1966). A serious, but
readable account of women in the Civil War, including the sanitary commission, home-
front activities and actual battlefield participation.
Morgan, Robin, ed. Sisterhood Is Powerful (New York: Vintage. 1970). One of a number
of readily available collections on the contemporary women's liberation movement.
O'Neill, William. Everyone Was Brave (Chicago: Quadrangle, 1969). O'Neill's study of
American feminism includes portraits of women reformers and suffragettes, and mate-
rial on groups like the National Consumers' League, as well as on the suffrage struggle.
Scott, Anne Firor, ed. The American Woman: Who Was She? (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Spectrum. 1971). Documents on the history of women in labor, education, r..l'qrm
movements and the suffrage struggle.
Spruill, Julia Cherry. Women's Life and Work in Southern Colonies (Chapel Hill. N.( .:
University of North Carolina Press, 1938). Spruill's massive study covers social atti-
tudes, legal status, contributions and work of Southern colonial women.
Trecker, Janice Law, "Women in U.S. History High School Textbooks," Social Education
(March, 4971). This critique of current history texts includes many suggestions for
women, events and ideas that ought to be included on the secondary level.
U.S. Government Printing Office. American Women. The Report of the Commission
(1963). In addition to the overall report on the status of women, reports of committees
and consultations on education, civil and political status, special problems of black
women, etc., are available.
. American Women. 1963.68. This is the 1968 report of the Citizen's Advisory
Council on the Status of Women.
A Matter of Simple Justice, 1970. The report of the President's Task Force on
Women's Rights and Responsibilities is a concise, hard-hitting document with practical
suggestions for improving the status of women.
1%9 Handbook on Women Workers. Women's Bureau Bulletin 294. The hand-
books of the Labor Department's Women's Bureau are a mine of information on
women as workers and also on their legal, educational and civil status.


[Page 317]
Photographs
PART ONE: p. xviii, Seattle Public Schools, Washington. CHAPTER 1: p. 11,
Public Health Service, National Archives;-p. 16, Seati,e Public Schools, Wash-
ington; p. 18, Washington State Office of Public Instruction, Olympia; p. 22,
(Richard Bellak) Office of Economic Opportunity. CHAPTER 2: p. 29, (Linda
Bartlett) and p. 37, (Roland L. Freeman) and p. 46, (Joan Larson), Office of
Economic Opportunity; p. 4', Xerox Education Publications. CHAPTER 3: p. 54,
p. 57 (Jan W. Faul) and p. 59 and p. 66, (Paul Conklin), Office of Economic
Opportul4v; p. 63, War Relocation Authority, National Archives. CHAPTER 4: p.
79, Michigan Migrant Education Program, Title 1; p. 86, Seattle Public Schools,
Washington; p. 89, published through cooperation of Allyn and Bacon; p. 99,
(Arthur Tress), Office of Economic Opportunity. CHAPTER 5: p. 107, Housing and
Urban Development; p. 110, Seattle Public Schools, Washington; p. 112, (Larry
Rana), U.S. Department of Agriculture. PART TWO: p. -114 (Bud DeWald),
Arizona Days and Ways. CHAPTER 6: pp. 121, 137, 139, 143, War Relocation
Authority, National Archives; p. 127, Public Health Service, National Archiver,
p. 133, Washington State Office of Public Instruction, Olympia. CHAPTER, 7: p.
150, Field Educational Publications, Inc.; p. 155, Toledo Public Schools, Ohio;
p. 168, (Carl Purcell), National Education Association; p. 173, (Jan W. Faul)
Office of Economic Opportunity. CHAPTER 8:-p. 187, Washington State Office of
Public Instruction, Olympia; pp. 189, 191, 195, U. S. Department of Agriculture.
CHArrEa 9: p. 203, (Paul Conklin) and p. 204, (Pete Liddell), Office of Economic
Opportunity; p. 208, Washington State Office of Public Instruction, Olympia; p.
216, Bureau of Indian Affairs. CHAPTER 10: p. 229, (Michael D. Sullivan) and pp.
236, 240, (Jan W. Faul) and p. 244, (Day Walters), Office of Economic Opportu-
nity; p. 233, (Nancy Rudolph), Housing and Urban Development. PART
THREE: p. 255, Dan Stainer. CHAPTER 11: p. 259, Washington State Office of
Public Instruction, Olympia; p. 262, Public Health Service, National Archives;
p. 265, (Day Walters) and p. 270, (Morton R. Engelberg) and p. 274, (Jan W.
Faul), Office of Economic Opportunity. CHAPTER 12: p. 281, Frank Leslie's
Illustrated Newspaper; pp. 285, 292, Washington State Office of Public Instruc-
tion, Olympia; p. 287, Office ci Economic Opportunity.
COVER DESIGN by Bill Caldwell
BOOK DESIGN AND PRODUCTION by Willadene Price


[Page 318]
NCSS Yearbooks
Forty-Second Yearbook (1972) Teaching About Life in the City, Richard
Wisniewski, ed. $5.50 (490-15272); cloth $7.00 (490-15274).
Forty-First Yearbook (1971) Values Education: Rationale, Strategies, and
Procedures, Lawrence E. Metcalf, ed. $5.00 (490-15268); cloth $6.50
(490-15270).
Fortieth Yearbook (1970) Focus on Geography: Key Concepts and Teach-
ing Strategies, Phillip Bacon, ed. $5.50 (490.15264); cloth $7.00 (490-
15266).
Thirty-Ninth Yearbook (1969) Social Studies Curriculum Development:
Prospects and Problems, Dorothy McClure Fraser, ed. $4.50 (490-
15240); cloth $5.50 (490-15242).
Thirty-Eighth Yearbook (1968) International Dimensions in the Social Stud-
ies, James M. Becker and Howard D. Mehlinger, co-editors. $4.50 (490-
15212); cloth $5.50 (490-15214).
Thirty-Seventh Yearbook (1967) Effective Thinking in the Social Studies,
Jean Fair and Fannie R. Shaftel, co-editors. $4.00 (490-15188); cloth
$5.00 (490-15190).
Thirty-Sixth Yearbook (1966) Political Science in the Social Studies, Robert
E. Cleary and Donald H. Riddle, co-editors. $4.00 (490-15162); cloth
$5.00 (490-15160).
Thirty-Fifth Yearbook (1965) EvaluatioL in Social Studies, Harry D. Berg,
ed. $4.00 (490-15128); cloth $5.00 (491, 15126).
Thirty-Fourth Yearbook (1961;rospectives in World History, Shirley
H. Engle, ed. $5.00 (490-15108); cloth $6.00 (490-15106).
Thirty-Third Yearbook (1963) Skill Development in Social Studies, Helen
McCracken Carpenter, ed. $4.00 (490-15064); cloth $5.00 (490-15062).
Thirty-Second Yearbook (1962) Social Studies in Elementary Schools, John
U. Michaelis, ed. $4.00 (490-15000); cloth $5.00 (490-14996).
Thirty-First Yearbook (1961) Interpreting and Teaching American History,
William H. Cartwright and Richard L. Watson; Jr., co-editors. $4.00
(490-15838); cloth $5.00 (490-14840).
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE SOCIAL STUDIES
1201 Sixteenth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036

